

PREFACE


The greater part of what is contained in these pages was published in the
_New York Age_ June 25, 1892, in explanation of the editorial which the
Memphis whites considered sufficiently infamous to justify the destruction
of my paper, the _Free Speech_.

Since the appearance of that statement, requests have come from all parts
of the country that "Exiled" (the name under which it then appeared) be
issued in pamphlet form. Some donations were made, but not enough for that
purpose. The noble effort of the ladies of New York and Brooklyn Oct. 5
have enabled me to comply with this request and give the world a true,
unvarnished account of the causes of lynch law in the South.

This statement is not a shield for the despoiler of virtue, nor altogether
a defense for the poor blind Afro-American Sampsons who suffer themselves
to be betrayed by white Delilahs. It is a contribution to truth, an array
of facts, the perusal of which it is hoped will stimulate this great
American Republic to demand that justice be done though the heavens fall.

It is with no pleasure I have dipped my hands in the corruption here
exposed. Somebody must show that the Afro-American race is more sinned
against than sinning, and it seems to have fallen upon me to do so. The
awful death-roll that Judge Lynch is calling every week is appalling, not
only because of the lives it takes, the rank cruelty and outrage to the
victims, but because of the prejudice it fosters and the stain it places
against the good name of a weak race.

The Afro-American is not a bestial race. If this work can contribute in
any way toward proving this, and at the same time arouse the conscience of
the American people to a demand for justice to every citizen, and
punishment by law for the lawless, I shall feel I have done my race a
service. Other considerations are of minor importance.

IDA B. WELLS
_New York City_, Oct. 26, 1892




To the Afro-American women of New York and Brooklyn, whose race love,
earnest zeal and unselfish effort at Lyric Hall, in the City of New York,
on the night of October 5, 1892--made possible its publication, this
pamphlet is gratefully dedicated by the author.




HON. FRED. DOUGLASS'S LETTER


_Dear Miss Wells:_

Let me give you thanks for your faithful paper on the lynch abomination
now generally practiced against colored people in the South. There has
been no word equal to it in convincing power. I have spoken, but my word
is feeble in comparison. You give us what you know and testify from actual
knowledge. You have dealt with the facts with cool, painstaking fidelity
and left those naked and uncontradicted facts to speak for themselves.

Brave woman! you have done your people and mine a service which can
neither be weighed nor measured. If American conscience were only half
alive, if the American church and clergy were only half christianized, if
American moral sensibility were not hardened by persistent infliction of
outrage and crime against colored people, a scream of horror, shame and
indignation would rise to Heaven wherever your pamphlet shall be read.

But alas! even crime has power to reproduce itself and create conditions
favorable to its own existence. It sometimes seems we are deserted by
earth and Heaven yet we must still think, speak and work, and trust in the
power of a merciful God for final deliverance.

Very truly and gratefully yours,
FREDERICK DOUGLASS
_Cedar Hill, Anacostia, D.C._, Oct. 25, 1892




1 _The_ OFFENSE


Wednesday evening May 24, 1892, the city of Memphis was filled with
excitement. Editorials in the daily papers of that date caused a meeting
to be held in the Cotton Exchange Building; a committee was sent for the
editors of the _Free Speech_ an Afro-American journal published in that
city, and the only reason the open threats of lynching that were made were
not carried out was because they could not be found. The cause of all this
commotion was the following editorial published in the _Free Speech_ May
21, 1892, the Saturday previous.

  Eight negroes lynched since last issue of the _Free Speech_ one at
  Little Rock, Ark., last Saturday morning where the citizens broke(?)
  into the penitentiary and got their man; three near Anniston, Ala., one
  near New Orleans; and three at Clarksville, Ga., the last three for
  killing a white man, and five on the same old racket--the new alarm
  about raping white women. The same programme of hanging, then shooting
  bullets into the lifeless bodies was carried out to the letter.

  Nobody in this section of the country believes the old thread-bare lie
  that Negro men rape white women. If Southern white men are not careful,
  they will overreach themselves and public sentiment will have a
  reaction; a conclusion will then be reached which will be very damaging
  to the moral reputation of their women.

The _Daily Commercial_ of Wednesday following, May 25, contained the
following leader:

  Those negroes who are attempting to make the lynching of individuals of
  their race a means for arousing the worst passions of their kind are
  playing with a dangerous sentiment. The negroes may as well understand
  that there is no mercy for the negro rapist and little patience with his
  defenders. A negro organ printed in this city, in a recent issue
  publishes the following atrocious paragraph: "Nobody in this section of
  the country believes the old thread-bare lie that negro men rape white
  women. If Southern white men are not careful they will overreach
  themselves, and public sentiment will have a reaction; and a conclusion
  will be reached which will be very damaging to the moral reputation of
  their women."

  The fact that a black scoundrel is allowed to live and utter such
  loathsome and repulsive calumnies is a volume of evidence as to the
  wonderful patience of Southern whites. But we have had enough of it.

  There are some things that the Southern white man will not tolerate, and
  the obscene intimations of the foregoing have brought the writer to the
  very outermost limit of public patience. We hope we have said enough.

The _Evening Scimitar_ of same date, copied the _Commercial_'s editorial
with these words of comment:

  Patience under such circumstances is not a virtue. If the negroes
  themselves do not apply the remedy without delay it will be the duty of
  those whom he has attacked to tie the wretch who utters these calumnies
  to a stake at the intersection of Main and Madison Sts., brand him in
  the forehead with a hot iron and perform upon him a surgical operation
  with a pair of tailor's shears.

Acting upon this advice, the leading citizens met in the Cotton Exchange
Building the same evening, and threats of lynching were freely indulged,
not by the lawless element upon which the deviltry of the South is usually
saddled--but by the leading business men, in their leading business
centre. Mr. Fleming, the business manager and owning a half interest the
_Free Speech_, had to leave town to escape the mob, and was afterwards
ordered not to return; letters and telegrams sent me in New York where I
was spending my vacation advised me that bodily harm awaited my return.
Creditors took possession of the office and sold the outfit, and the _Free
Speech_ was as if it had never been.

The editorial in question was prompted by the many inhuman and fiendish
lynchings of Afro-Americans which have recently taken place and was meant
as a warning. Eight lynched in one week and five of them charged with
rape! The thinking public will not easily believe freedom and education
more brutalizing than slavery, and the world knows that the crime of rape
was unknown during four years of civil war, when the white women of the
South were at the mercy of the race which is all at once charged with
being a bestial one.

Since my business has been destroyed and I am an exile from home because
of that editorial, the issue has been forced, and as the writer of it I
feel that the race and the public generally should have a statement of the
facts as they exist. They will serve at the same time as a defense for the
Afro-Americans Sampsons who suffer themselves to be betrayed by white
Delilahs.

The whites of Montgomery, Ala., knew J.C. Duke sounded the keynote of the
situation--which they would gladly hide from the world, when he said in
his paper, the _Herald_, five years ago: "Why is it that white women
attract negro men now more than in former days? There was a time when such
a thing was unheard of. There is a secret to this thing, and we greatly
suspect it is the growing appreciation of white Juliets for colored
Romeos." Mr. Duke, like the _Free Speech_ proprietors, was forced to leave
the city for reflecting on the "honah" of white women and his paper
suppressed; but the truth remains that Afro-American men do not always
rape(?) white women without their consent.

Mr. Duke, before leaving Montgomery, signed a card disclaiming any
intention of slandering Southern white women. The editor of the _Free
Speech_ has no disclaimer to enter, but asserts instead that there are
many white women in the South who would marry colored men if such an act
would not place them at once beyond the pale of society and within the
clutches of the law. The miscegnation laws of the South only operate
against the legitimate union of the races; they leave the white man free
to seduce all the colored girls he can, but it is death to the colored man
who yields to the force and advances of a similar attraction in white
women. White men lynch the offending Afro-American, not because he is a
despoiler of virtue, but because he succumbs to the smiles of white women.




2

_The_ BLACK _and_ WHITE _of_ IT


The _Cleveland Gazette_ of January 16, 1892, publishes a case in point.
Mrs. J.S. Underwood, the wife of a minister of Elyria, Ohio, accused an
Afro-American of rape. She told her husband that during his absence in
1888, stumping the State for the Prohibition Party, the man came to the
kitchen door, forced his way in the house and insulted her. She tried to
drive him out with a heavy poker, but he overpowered and chloroformed her,
and when she revived her clothing was torn and she was in a horrible
condition. She did not know the man but could identify him. She pointed
out William Offett, a married man, who was arrested and, being in Ohio,
was granted a trial.

The prisoner vehemently denied the charge of rape, but confessed he went
to Mrs. Underwood's residence at her invitation and was criminally
intimate with her at her request. This availed him nothing against the
sworn testimony of a ministers wife, a lady of the highest respectability.
He was found guilty, and entered the penitentiary, December 14, 1888, for
fifteen years. Some time afterwards the woman's remorse led her to confess
to her husband that the man was innocent.

These are her words:

  I met Offett at the Post Office. It was raining. He was polite to me,
  and as I had several bundles in my arms he offered to carry them home
  for me, which he did. He had a strange fascination for me, and I invited
  him to call on me. He called, bringing chestnuts and candy for the
  children. By this means we got them to leave us alone in the room. Then
  I sat on his lap. He made a proposal to me and I readily consented. Why
  I did so, I do not know, but that I did is true. He visited me several
  times after that and each time I was indiscreet. I did not care after
  the first time. In fact I could not have resisted, and had no desire to
  resist.

When asked by her husband why she told him she had been outraged, she
said: "I had several reasons for telling you. One was the neighbors saw
the fellows here, another was, I was afraid I had contracted a loathsome
disease, and still another was that I feared I might give birth to a Negro
baby. I hoped to save my reputation by telling you a deliberate lie." Her
husband horrified by the confession had Offett, who had already served
four years, released and secured a divorce.

There are thousands of such cases throughout the South, with the
difference that the Southern white men in insatiate fury wreak their
vengeance without intervention of law upon the Afro-Americans who consort
with their women. A few instances to substantiate the assertion that some
white women love the company of the Afro-American will not be out of
place. Most of these cases were reported by the daily papers of the South.

In the winter of 1885-86 the wife of a practicing physician in Memphis, in
good social standing whose name has escaped me, left home, husband and
children, and ran away with her black coachman. She was with him a month
before her husband found and brought her home. The coachman could not be
found. The doctor moved his family away from Memphis, and is living in
another city under an assumed name.

In the same city last year a white girl in the dusk of evening screamed at
the approach of some parties that a Negro had assaulted her on the street.
He was captured, tried by a white judge and jury, that acquitted him of
the charge. It is needless to add if there had been a scrap of evidence on
which to convict him of so grave a charge he would have been convicted.

Sarah Clark of Memphis loved a black man and lived openly with him. When
she was indicted last spring for miscegenation, she swore in court that
she was _not_ a white woman. This she did to escape the penitentiary and
continued her illicit relation undisturbed. That she is of the lower class
of whites, does not disturb the fact that she is a white woman. "The
leading citizens" of Memphis are defending the "honor" of _all_ white
women, _demi-monde_ included.

Since the manager of the _Free Speech_ has been run away from Memphis by
the guardians of the honor of Southern white women, a young girl living on
Poplar St., who was discovered in intimate relations with a handsome
mulatto young colored man, Will Morgan by name, stole her father's money
to send the young fellow away from that father's wrath. She has since
joined him in Chicago.

The _Memphis Ledger_ for June 8 has the following:

  If Lillie Bailey, a rather pretty white girl seventeen years of age, who
  is now at the City Hospital, would be somewhat less reserved about her
  disgrace there would be some very nauseating details in the story of her
  life. She is the mother of a little coon. The truth might reveal fearful
  depravity or it might reveal the evidence of a rank outrage. She will
  not divulge the name of the man who has left such black evidence of her
  disgrace, and, in fact, says it is a matter in which there can be no
  interest to the outside world. She came to Memphis nearly three months
  ago and was taken in at the Woman's Refuge in the southern part of the
  city. She remained there until a few weeks ago, when the child was born.
  The ladies in charge of the Refuge were horified. The girl was at once
  sent to the City Hospital, where she has been since May 30. She is a
  country girl. She came to Memphis from her fathers farm, a short
  distance from Hernando, Miss. Just when she left there she would not
  say. In fact she says she came to Memphis from Arkansas, and says her
  home is in that State. She is rather good looking, has blue eyes, a low
  forehead and dark red hair. The ladies at the Woman's Refuge do not know
  anything about the girl further than what they learned when she was an
  inmate of the institution; and she would not tell much. When the child
  was born an attempt was made to get the girl to reveal the name of the
  Negro who had disgraced her, she obstinately refused and it was
  impossible to elicit any information from her on the subject.

Note the wording. "The truth might reveal fearful depravity or rank
outrage." If it had been a white child or Lillie Bailey had told a pitiful
story of Negro outrage, it would have been a case of woman's weakness or
assault and she could have remained at the Woman's Refuge. But a Negro
child and to withhold its father's name and thus prevent the killing of
another Negro "rapist." A case of "fearful depravity."

The very week the "leading citizens" of Memphis were making a spectacle of
themselves in defense of all white women of every kind, an Afro-American,
M. Stricklin, was found in a white woman's room in that city. Although
she made no outcry of rape, he was jailed and would have been lynched, but
the woman stated she bought curtains of him (he was a furniture dealer)
and his business in her room that night was to put them up. A white
woman's word was taken as absolutely in this case as when the cry of rape
is made, and he was freed.

What is true of Memphis is true of the entire South. The daily papers last
year reported a farmer's wife in Alabama had given birth to a Negro child.
When the Negro farm hand who was plowing in the field heard it he took the
mule from the plow and fled. The dispatches also told of a woman in South
Carolina who gave birth to a Negro child and charged three men with being
its father, _every one of whom has since disappeared_. In Tuscumbia, Ala.,
the colored boy who was lynched there last year for assaulting a white
girl told her before his accusers that he had met her there in the woods
often before.

Frank Weems of Chattanooga who was not lynched in May only because the
prominent citizens became his body guard until the doors of the
penitentiary closed on him, had letters in his pocket from the white woman
in the case, making the appointment with him. Edward Coy who was burned
alive in Texarkana, January 1, 1892, died protesting his innocence.
Investigation since as given by the Bystander in the _Chicago Inter
Ocean_, October 1, proves:

  1. The woman who was paraded as a victim of violence was of bad
  character; her husband was a drunkard and a gambler.

  2. She was publicly reported and generally known to have been criminally
  intimate with Coy for more than a year previous.

  3. She was compelled by threats, if not by violence, to make the charge
  against the victim.

  4. When she came to apply the match Coy asked her if she would burn him
  after they had "been sweethearting" so long.

  5. A large majority of the "superior" white men prominent in the affair
  are the reputed fathers of mulatto children.

  These are not pleasant facts, but they are illustrative of the vital
  phase of the so-called race question, which should properly be
  designated an earnest inquiry as to the best methods by which religion,
  science, law and political power may be employed to excuse injustice,
  barbarity and crime done to a people because of race and color. There
  can be no possible belief that these people were inspired by any
  consuming zeal to vindicate God's law against miscegnationists of the
  most practical sort. The woman was a willing partner in the victim's
  guilt, and being of the "superior" race must naturally have been more
  guilty.

In Natchez, Miss., Mrs. Marshall, one of the _creme de la creme_ of the
city, created a tremendous sensation several years ago. She has a black
coachman who was married, and had been in her employ several years. During
this time she gave birth to a child whose color was remarked, but traced
to some brunette ancestor, and one of the fashionable dames of the city
was its godmother. Mrs. Marshall's social position was unquestioned, and
wealth showered every dainty on this child which was idolized with its
brothers and sisters by its white papa. In course of time another child
appeared on the scene, but it was unmistakably dark. All were alarmed, and
"rush of blood, strangulation" were the conjectures, but the doctor, when
asked the cause, grimly told them it was a Negro child. There was a family
conclave, the coachman heard of it and leaving his own family went West,
and has never returned. As soon as Mrs. Marshall was able to travel she
was sent away in deep disgrace. Her husband died within the year of a
broken heart.

Ebenzer Fowler, the wealthiest colored man in Issaquena County, Miss., was
shot down on the street in Mayersville, January 30, 1885, just before dark
by an armed body of white men who filled his body with bullets. They
charged him with writing a note to a white woman of the place, which they
intercepted and which proved there was an intimacy existing between them.

Hundreds of such cases might be cited, but enough have been given to prove
the assertion that there are white women in the South who love the
Afro-American's company even as there are white men notorious for their
preference for Afro-American women.

There is hardly a town in the South which has not an instance of the kind
which is well known, and hence the assertion is reiterated that "nobody in
the South believes the old thread bare lie that negro men rape white
women." Hence there is a growing demand among Afro-Americans that the
guilt or innocence of parties accused of rape be fully established. They
know the men of the section of the country who refuse this are not so
desirous of punishing rapists as they pretend. The utterances of the
leading white men show that with them it is not the crime but the _class_.
Bishop Fitzgerald has become apologist for lynchers of the rapists of
_white_ women only. Governor Tillman, of South Carolina, in the month of
June, standing under the tree in Barnwell, S.C., on which eight
Afro-Americans were hung last year, declared that he would lead a mob to
lynch a _negro_ who raped a _white_ woman. So say the pulpits, officials
and newspapers of the South. But when the victim is a colored woman it is
different.

Last winter in Baltimore, Md., three white ruffians assaulted a Miss
Camphor, a young Afro-American girl, while out walking with a young man of
her own race. They held her escort and outraged the girl. It was a deed
dastardly enough to arouse Southern blood, which gives its horror of rape
as excuse for lawlessness, but she was an Afro-American. The case went to
the courts, an Afro-American lawyer defended the men and they were
acquitted.

In Nashville, Tenn., there is a white man, Pat Hanifan, who outraged a
little Afro-American girl, and, from the physical injuries received, she
has been ruined for life. He was jailed for six months, discharged, and is
now a detective in that city. In the same city, last May, a white man
outraged an Afro-American girl in a drug store. He was arrested, and
released on bail at the trial. It was rumored that five hundred
Afro-Americans had organized to lynch him. Two hundred and fifty white
citizens armed themselves with Winchesters and guarded him. A cannon was
placed in front of his home, and the Buchanan Rifles (State Militia)
ordered to the scene for his protection. The Afro-American mob did not
materialize. Only two weeks before Eph. Grizzard, who had only been
_charged_ with rape upon a white woman, had been taken from the jail, with
Governor Buchanan and the police and militia standing by, dragged through
the streets in broad daylight, knives plunged into him at every step, and
with every fiendish cruelty a frenzied mob could devise, he was at last
swung out on the bridge with hands cut to pieces as he tried to climb up
the stanchions. A naked, bloody example of the blood-thirstiness of the
nineteenth-century civilization of the Athens of the South! No cannon or
military was called out in his defense. He dared to visit a white woman.

At the very moment these civilized whites were announcing their
determination "to protect their wives and daughters," by murdering
Grizzard, a white man was in the same jail for raping eight-year-old
Maggie Reese, an Afro-American girl. He was not harmed. The "honor" of
grown women who were glad enough to be supported by the Grizzard boys and
Ed Coy, as long as the liaison was not known, needed protection; they were
white. The outrage upon helpless childhood needed no avenging in this
case; she was black.

A white man in Guthrie, Oklahoma Territory, two months ago inflicted such
injuries upon another Afro-American child that she died. He was not
punished, but an attempt was made in the same town in the month of June to
lynch an Afro-American who visited a white woman.

In Memphis, Tenn., in the month of June, Ellerton L. Dorr, who is the
husband of Russell Hancock's widow, was arrested for attempted rape on
Mattie Cole, a neighbors cook; he was only prevented from accomplishing
his purpose, by the appearance of Mattie's employer. Dorr's friends say he
was drunk and not responsible for his actions. The grand jury refused to
indict him and he was discharged.




3 _The_ NEW CRY


The appeal of Southern whites to Northern sympathy and sanction, the
adroit, insiduous plea made by Bishop Fitzgerald for suspension of
judgment because those "who condemn lynching express no sympathy for the
_white_ woman in the case," falls to the ground in the light of the
foregoing.

From this exposition of the race issue in lynch law, the whole matter is
explained by the well-known opposition growing out of slavery to the
progress of the race. This is crystalized in the oft-repeated slogan:
"This is a white man's country and the white man must rule." The South
resented giving the Afro-American his freedom, the ballot box and the
Civil Rights Law. The raids of the Ku-Klux and White Liners to subvert
reconstruction government, the Hamburg and Ellerton, S.C., the Copiah
County, Miss., and the Layfayette Parish, La., massacres were excused as
the natural resentment of intelligence against government by ignorance.

Honest white men practically conceded the necessity of intelligence
murdering ignorance to correct the mistake of the general government, and
the race was left to the tender mercies of the solid South. Thoughtful
Afro-Americans with the strong arm of the government withdrawn and with
the hope to stop such wholesale massacres urged the race to sacrifice its
political rights for sake of peace. They honestly believed the race should
fit itself for government, and when that should be done, the objection to
race participation in politics would be removed.

But the sacrifice did not remove the trouble, nor move the South to
justice. One by one the Southern States have legally(?) disfranchised the
Afro-American, and since the repeal of the Civil Rights Bill nearly every
Southern State has passed separate car laws with a penalty against their
infringement. The race regardless of advancement is penned into filthy,
stifling partitions cut off from smoking cars. All this while, although
the political cause has been removed, the butcheries of black men at
Barnwell, S.C., Carrolton, Miss., Waycross, Ga., and Memphis, Tenn., have
gone on; also the flaying alive of a man in Kentucky, the burning of one
in Arkansas, the hanging of a fifteen-year-old girl in Louisiana, a woman
in Jackson, Tenn., and one in Hollendale, Miss., until the dark and bloody
record of the South shows 728 Afro-Americans lynched during the past eight
years. Not fifty of these were for political causes; the rest were for all
manner of accusations from that of rape of white women, to the case of the
boy Will Lewis who was hanged at Tullahoma, Tenn., last year for being
drunk and "sassy" to white folks.

These statistics compiled by the _Chicago Tribune_ were given the first of
this year (1892). Since then, not less than one hundred and fifty have
been known to have met violent death at the hands of cruel bloodthirsty
mobs during the past nine months.

To palliate this record (which grows worse as the Afro-American becomes
intelligent) and excuse some of the most heinous crimes that ever stained
the history of a country, the South is shielding itself behind the
plausible screen of defending the honor of its women. This, too, in the
face of the fact that only _one-third_ of the 728 victims to mobs have
been _charged_ with rape, to say nothing of those of that one-third who
were innocent of the charge. A white correspondent of the _Baltimore Sun_
declares that the Afro-American who was lynched in Chestertown, Md., in
May for assault on a white girl was innocent; that the deed was done by a
white man who had since disappeared. The girl herself maintained that her
assailant was a white man. When that poor Afro-American was murdered, the
whites excused their refusal of a trial on the ground that they wished to
spare the white girl the mortification of having to testify in court.

This cry has had its effect. It has closed the heart, stifled the
conscience, warped the judgment and hushed the voice of press and pulpit
on the subject of lynch law throughout this "land of liberty." Men who
stand high in the esteem of the public for Christian character, for moral
and physical courage, for devotion to the principles of equal and exact
justice to all, and for great sagacity, stand as cowards who fear to open
their mouths before this great outrage. They do not see that by their
tacit encouragement, their silent acquiescence, the black shadow of
lawlessness in the form of lynch law is spreading its wings over the whole
country.

Men who, like Governor Tillman, start the ball of lynch law rolling for a
certain crime, are powerless to stop it when drunken or criminal white
toughs feel like hanging an Afro-American on any pretext.

Even to the better class of Afro-Americans the crime of rape is so
revolting they have too often taken the white man's word and given lynch
law neither the investigation nor condemnation it deserved.

They forget that a concession of the right to lynch a man for a certain
crime, not only concedes the right to lynch any person for any crime, but
(so frequently is the cry of rape now raised) it is in a fair way to stamp
us a race of rapists and desperadoes. They have gone on hoping and
believing that general education and financial strength would solve the
difficulty, and are devoting their energies to the accumulation of both.

The mob spirit has grown with the increasing intelligence of the
Afro-American. It has left the out-of-the-way places where ignorance
prevails, has thrown off the mask and with this new cry stalks in broad
daylight in large cities, the centers of civilization, and is encouraged
by the "leading citizens" and the press.




4 _The_ MALICIOUS _and_ UNTRUTHFUL WHITE PRESS


The _Daily Commercial_ and _Evening Scimitar_ of Memphis, Tenn., are owned
by leading business men of that city, and yet, in spite of the fact that
there had been no white woman in Memphis outraged by an Afro-American, and
that Memphis possessed a thrifty law-abiding, property-owning class of
Afro-Americans the _Commercial_ of May 17, under the head of "More Rapes,
More Lynchings" gave utterance to the following:

  The lynching of three Negro scoundrels reported in our dispatches from
  Anniston, Ala., for a brutal outrage committed upon a white woman will
  be a text for much comment on "Southern barbarism" by Northern
  newspapers; but we fancy it will hardly prove effective for campaign
  purposes among intelligent people. The frequency of these lynchings
  calls attention to the frequency of the crimes which causes lynching.
  The "Southern barbarism" which deserves the serious attention of all
  people North and South, is the barbarism which preys upon weak and
  defenseless women. Nothing but the most prompt, speedy and extreme
  punishment can hold in check the horrible and beastial propensities of
  the Negro race. There is a strange similarity about a number of cases of
  this character which have lately occurred.

  In each case the crime was deliberately planned and perpetrated by
  several Negroes. They watched for an opportunity when the women were
  left without a protector. It was not a sudden yielding to a fit of
  passion, but the consummation of a devilish purpose which has been
  seeking and waiting for the opportunity. This feature of the crime not
  only makes it the most fiendishly brutal, but it adds to the terror of
  the situation in the thinly settled country communities. No man can
  leave his family at night without the dread that some roving Negro
  ruffian is watching and waiting for this opportunity. The swift
  punishment which invariably follows these horrible crimes doubtless acts
  as a deterring effect upon the Negroes in that immediate neighborhood
  for a short time. But the lesson is not widely learned nor long
  remembered. Then such crimes, equally atrocious, have happened in quick
  succession, one in Tennessee, one in Arkansas, and one in Alabama. The
  facts of the crime appear to appeal more to the Negro's lustful
  imagination than the facts of the punishment do to his fears. He sets
  aside all fear of death in any form when opportunity is found for the
  gratification of his bestial desires.

  There is small reason to hope for any change for the better. The
  commission of this crime grows more frequent every year. The generation
  of Negroes which have grown up since the war have lost in large measure
  the traditional and wholesome awe of the white race which kept the
  Negroes in subjection, even when their masters were in the army, and
  their families left unprotected except by the slaves themselves. There
  is no longer a restraint upon the brute passion of the Negro.

  What is to be done? The crime of rape is always horrible, but the
  Southern man there is nothing which so fills the soul with horror,
  loathing and fury as the outraging of a white woman by a Negro. It is
  the race question in the ugliest, vilest, most dangerous aspect. The
  Negro as a political factor can be controlled. But neither laws nor
  lynchings can subdue his lusts. Sooner or later it will force a crisis.
  We do not know in what form it will come.

In its issue of June 4, the _Memphis Evening Scimitar_ gives the following
excuse for lynch law:

  Aside from the violation of white women by Negroes, which is the
  outcropping of a bestial perversion of instinct, the chief cause of
  trouble between the races in the South is the Negro's lack of manners.
  In the state of slavery he learned politeness from association with
  white people, who took pains to teach him. Since the emancipation came
  and the tie of mutual interest and regard between master and servant was
  broken, the Negro has drifted away into a state which is neither freedom
  nor bondage. Lacking the proper inspiration of the one and the
  restraining force of the other he has taken up the idea that boorish
  insolence is independence, and the exercise of a decent degree of
  breeding toward white people is identical with servile submission. In
  consequence of the prevalence of this notion there are many Negroes who
  use every opportunity to make themselves offensive, particularly when
  they think it can be done with impunity.

  We have had too many instances right here in Memphis to doubt this, and
  our experience is not exceptional. _The white people won't stand this
  sort of thing, and whether they be insulted as individuals are as a
  race, the response will be prompt and effectual._ The bloody riot of
  1866, in which so many Negroes perished, was brought on principally by
  the outrageous conduct of the blacks toward the whites on the streets.
  It is also a remarkable and discouraging fact that the majority of such
  scoundrels are Negroes who have received educational advantages at the
  hands of the white taxpayers. They have got just enough of learning to
  make them realize how hopelessly their race is behind the other in
  everything that makes a great people, and they attempt to "get even" by
  insolence, which is ever the resentment of inferiors. There are
  well-bred Negroes among us, and it is truly unfortunate that they should
  have to pay, even in part, the penalty of the offenses committed by the
  baser sort, but this is the way of the world. The innocent must suffer
  for the guilty. If the Negroes as a people possessed a hundredth part of
  the self-respect which is evidenced by the courteous bearing of some
  that the _Scimitar_ could name, the friction between the races would be
  reduced to a minimum. It will not do to beg the question by pleading
  that many white men are also stirring up strife. The Caucasian
  blackguard simply obeys the promptings of a depraved disposition, and he
  is seldom deliberately rough or offensive toward strangers or
  unprotected women.

  The Negro tough, on the contrary, is given to just that kind of
  offending, and he almost invariably singles out white people as his
  victims.

On March 9, 1892, there were lynched in this same city three of the best
specimens of young since-the-war Afro-American manhood. They were
peaceful, law-abiding citizens and energetic business men.

They believed the problem was to be solved by eschewing politics and
putting money in the purse. They owned a flourishing grocery business in a
thickly populated suburb of Memphis, and a white man named Barrett had one
on the opposite corner. After a personal difficulty which Barrett sought
by going into the "People's Grocery" drawing a pistol and was thrashed by
Calvin McDowell, he (Barrett) threatened to "clean them out." These men
were a mile beyond the city limits and police protection; hearing that
Barrett's crowd was coming to attack them Saturday night, they mustered
forces, and prepared to defend themselves against the attack.

When Barrett came he led a _posse_ of officers, twelve in number, who
afterward claimed to be hunting a man for whom they had a warrant. That
twelve men in citizen's clothes should think it necessary to go in the
night to hunt one man who had never before been arrested, or made any
record as a criminal has never been explained. When they entered the back
door the young men thought the threatened attack was on, and fired into
them. Three of the officers were wounded, and when the _defending_ party
found it was officers of the law upon whom they had fired, they ceased and
got away.

Thirty-one men were arrested and thrown in jail as "conspirators,"
although they all declared more than once they did not know they were
firing on officers. Excitement was at fever beat until the morning papers,
two days after, announced that the wounded deputy sheriffs were out of
danger. This hindered rather than helped the plans of the whites. There
was no law on the statute books which would execute an Afro-American for
wounding a white man, but the "unwritten law" did. Three of these men, the
president, the manager and clerk of the grocery--"the leaders of the
conspiracy"--were secretly taken from jail and lynched in a shockingly
brutal manner. "The Negroes are getting too independent," they say, "we
must teach them a lesson."

What lesson? The lesson of subordination. "Kill the leaders and it will
cow the Negro who dares to shoot a white man, even in self-defense."

Although the race was wild over the outrage, the mockery of law and
justice which disarmed men and locked them up in jails where they could be
easily and safely reached by the mob--- the Afro-American ministers,
newspapers and leaders counselled obedience to the law which did not
protect them.

Their counsel was heeded and not a hand was uplifted to resent the
outrage; following the advice of the _Free Speech_, people left the city
in great numbers.

The dailies and associated press reports heralded these men to the country
as "toughs," and "Negro desperadoes who kept a low dive." This same press
service printed that the Negro who was lynched at Indianola, Miss., in
May, had outraged the sheriff's eight-year-old daughter. The girl was more
than eighteen years old, and was found by her father in this man's room,
who was a servant on the place.

Not content with misrepresenting the race, the mob-spirit was not to be
satisfied until the paper which was doing all it could to counteract this
impression was silenced. The colored people were resenting their bad
treatment in a way to make itself felt, yet gave the mob no excuse for
further murder, until the appearance of the editorial which is construed
as a reflection on the "honor" of the Southern white women. It is not half
so libelous as that of the _Commercial_ which appeared four days before,
and which has been given in these pages. They would have lynched the
manager of the _Free Speech_ for exercising the right of free speech if
they had found him as quickly as they would have hung a rapist, and glad
of the excuse to do so. The owners were ordered not to return, the _Free
Speech_ was suspended with as little compunction as the business of the
"People's Grocery" broken up and the proprietors murdered.




5 _The_ SOUTH'S POSITION


Henry W. Grady in his well-remembered speeches in New England and New York
pictured the Afro-American as incapable of self-government. Through him
and other leading men the cry of the South to the country has been "Hands
off! Leave us to solve our problem." To the Afro-American the South says,
"the white man must and will rule." There is little difference between the
Antebellum South and the New South.

Her white citizens are wedded to any method however revolting, any measure
however extreme, for the subjugation of the young manhood of the race.
They have cheated him out of his ballot, deprived him of civil rights or
redress therefor in the civil courts, robbed him of the fruits of his
labor, and are still murdering, burning and lynching him.

The result is a growing disregard of human life. Lynch law has spread its
insiduous influence till men in New York State, Pennsylvania and on the
free Western plains feel they can take the law in their own hands with
impunity, especially where an Afro-American is concerned. The South is
brutalized to a degree not realized by its own inhabitants, and the very
foundation of government, law and order, are imperilled.

Public sentiment has had a slight "reaction" though not sufficient to stop
the crusade of lawlessness and lynching. The spirit of christianity of the
great M.E. Church was aroused to the frequent and revolting crimes against
a weak people, enough to pass strong condemnatory resolutions at its
General Conference in Omaha last May. The spirit of justice of the grand
old party asserted itself sufficiently to secure a denunciation of the
wrongs, and a feeble declaration of the belief in human rights in the
Republican platform at Minneapolis, June 7. Some of the great dailies and
weeklies have swung into line declaring that lynch law must go. The
President of the United States issued a proclamation that it be not
tolerated in the territories over which he has jurisdiction. Governor
Northern and Chief Justice Bleckley of Georgia have proclaimed against it.
The citizens of Chattanooga, Tenn., have set a worthy example in that they
not only condemn lynch law, but her public men demanded a trial for Weems,
the accused rapist, and guarded him while the trial was in progress. The
trial only lasted ten minutes, and Weems chose to plead guilty and accept
twenty-one years sentence, than invite the certain death which awaited him
outside that cordon of police if he had told the truth and shown the
letters he had from the white woman in the case.

Col. A.S. Colyar, of Nashville, Tenn., is so overcome with the horrible
state of affairs that he addressed the following earnest letter to the
_Nashville American_.

  Nothing since I have been a reading man has so impressed me with the
  decay of manhood among the people of Tennessee as the dastardly
  submission to the mob reign. We have reached the unprecedented low
  level; the awful criminal depravity of substituting the mob for the
  court and jury, of giving up the jail keys to the mob whenever they are
  demanded. We do it in the largest cities and in the country towns; we do
  it in midday; we do it after full, not to say formal, notice, and so
  thoroughly and generally is it acquiesced in that the murderers have
  discarded the formula of masks. They go into the town where everybody
  knows them, sometimes under the gaze of the governor, in the presence of
  the courts, in the presence of the sheriff and his deputies, in the
  presence of the entire police force, take out the prisoner, take his
  life, often with fiendish glee, and often with acts of cruelty and
  barbarism which impress the reader with a degeneracy rapidly approaching
  savage life. That the State is disgraced but faintly expresses the
  humiliation which has settled upon the once proud people of Tennessee.
  The State, in its majesty, through its organized life, for which the
  people pay liberally, makes but one record, but one note, and that a
  criminal falsehood, "was hung by persons to the jury unknown." The
  murder at Shelbyville is only a verification of what every intelligent
  man knew would come, because with a mob a rumor is as good as a proof.

These efforts brought forth apologies and a short halt, but the lynching
mania was raged again through the past three months with unabated fury.

The strong arm of the law must be brought to bear upon lynchers in severe
punishment, but this cannot and will not be done unless a healthy public
sentiment demands and sustains such action.

The men and women in the South who disapprove of lynching and remain
silent on the perpetration of such outrages, are particeps criminis,
accomplices, accessories before and after the fact, equally guilty with
the actual lawbreakers who would not persist if they did not know that
neither the law nor militia would be employed against them.




6 SELF-HELP


In the creation of this healthier public sentiment, the Afro-American can
do for himself what no one else can do for him. The world looks on with
wonder that we have conceded so much and remain law-abiding under such
great outrage and provocation.

To Northern capital and Afro-American labor the South owes its
rehabilitation. If labor is withdrawn capital will not remain. The
Afro-American is thus the backbone of the South. A thorough knowledge and
judicious exercise of this power in lynching localities could many times
effect a bloodless revolution. The white man's dollar is his god, and to
stop this will be to stop outrages in many localities.

The Afro-Americans of Memphis denounced the lynching of three of their
best citizens, and urged and waited for the authorities to act in the
matter and bring the lynchers to justice. No attempt was made to do so,
and the black men left the city by thousands, bringing about great
stagnation in every branch of business. Those who remained so injured the
business of the street car company by staying off the cars, that the
superintendent, manager and treasurer called personally on the editor of
the _Free Speech_, asked them to urge our people to give them their
patronage again. Other business men became alarmed over the situation and
the _Free Speech_ was run away that the colored people might be more
easily controlled. A meeting of white citizens in June, three months after
the lynching, passed resolutions for the first time, condemning it. _But
they did not punish the lynchers._ Every one of them was known by name,
because they had been selected to do the dirty work, by some of the very
citizens who passed these resolutions. Memphis is fast losing her black
population, who proclaim as they go that there is no protection for the
life and property of any Afro-American citizen in Memphis who is not a
slave.

The Afro-American citizens of Kentucky, whose intellectual and financial
improvement has been phenomenal, have never had a separate car law until
now. Delegations and petitions poured into the Legislature against it, yet
the bill passed and the Jim Crow Car of Kentucky is a legalized
institution. Will the great mass of Negroes continue to patronize the
railroad? A special from Covington, Ky., says:

Covington, June 13.--The railroads of the State are beginning to feel very
markedly, the effects of the separate coach bill recently passed by the
Legislature. No class of people in the State have so many and so largely
attended excursions as the blacks. All these have been abandoned, and
regular travel is reduced to a minimum. A competent authority says the
loss to the various roads will reach $1,000,000 this year.

A call to a State Conference in Lexington, Ky., last June had delegates
from every county in the State. Those delegates, the ministers, teachers,
heads of secret and others orders, and the head of every family should
pass the word around for every member of the race in Kentucky to stay oil
railroads unless obliged to ride. If they did so, and their advice was
followed persistently the convention would not need to petition the
Legislature to repeal the law or raise money to file a suit. The railroad
corporations would be so effected they would in self-defense lobby to have
the separate car law repealed. On the other hand, as long as the railroads
can get Afro-American excursions they will always have plenty of money to
fight all the suits brought against them. They will be aided in so doing
by the same partisan public sentiment which passed the law. White men
passed the law, and white judges and juries would pass upon the suits
against the law, and render judgment in line with their prejudices and in
deference to the greater financial power.

The appeal to the white man's pocket has ever been more effectual than all
the appeals ever made to his conscience. Nothing, absolutely nothing, is
to be gained by a further sacrifice of manhood and self-respect. By the
right exercise of his power as the industrial factor of the South, the
Afro-American can demand and secure his rights, the punishment of
lynchers, and a fair trial for accused rapists.

Of the many inhuman outrages of this present year, the only case where the
proposed lynching did _not_ occur, was where the men armed themselves in
Jacksonville, Fla., and Paducah, Ky, and prevented it. The only times an
Afro-American who was assaulted got away has been when he had a gun and
used it in self-defense.

The lesson this teaches and which every Afro-American should ponder well,
is that a Winchester rifle should have a place of honor in every black
home, and it should be used for that protection which the law refuses to
give. When the white man who is always the aggressor knows he runs as
great risk of biting the dust every time his Afro-American victim does, he
will have greater respect for Afro-American life. The more the
Afro-American yields and cringes and begs, the more he has to do so, the
more he is insulted, outraged and lynched.

The assertion has been substantiated throughout these pages that the press
contains unreliable and doctored reports of lynchings, and one of the most
necessary things for the race to do is to get these facts before the
public. The people must know before they can act, and there is no educator
to compare with the press.

The Afro-American papers are the only ones which will print the truth, and
they lack means to employ agents and detectives to get at the facts. The
race must rally a mighty host to the support of their journals, and thus
enable them to do much in the way of investigation.

A lynching occurred at Port Jarvis, N.Y., the first week in June. A white
and colored man were implicated in the assault upon a white girl. It was
charged that the white man paid the colored boy to make the assault, which
he did on the public highway in broad day time, and was lynched. This, too
was done by "parties unknown." The white man in the case still lives. He
was imprisoned and promises to fight the case on trial. At the preliminary
examination, it developed that he had been a suitor of the girl's. She had
repulsed and refused him, yet had given him money, and he had sent
threatening letters demanding more.

The day before this examination she was so wrought up, she left home and
wandered miles away. When found she said she did so because she was afraid
of the man's testimony. Why should she be afraid of the prisoner! Why
should she yield to his demands for money if not to prevent him exposing
something he knew! It seems explainable only on the hypothesis that a
_liaison_ existed between the colored boy and the girl, and the white man
knew of it. The press is singularly silent. Has it a motive? We owe it to
ourselves to find out.

The story comes from Larned, Kansas, Oct. 1, that a young white lady held
at bay until daylight, without alarming any one in the house, "a burly
Negro" who entered her room and bed. The "burly Negro" was promptly
lynched without investigation or examination of inconsistant stories.

A house was found burned down near Montgomery, Ala., in Monroe County,
Oct. 13, a few weeks ago; also the burned bodies of the owners and melted
piles of gold and silver.

These discoveries led to the conclusion that the awful crime was not
prompted by motives of robbery. The suggestion of the whites was that
"brutal lust was the incentive, and as there are nearly 200 Negroes living
within a radius of five miles of the place the conclusion was inevitable
that some of them were the perpetrators."

Upon this "suggestion" probably made by the real criminal, the mob acted
upon the "conclusion" and arrested ten Afro-Americans, four of whom, they
tell the world, confessed to the deed of murdering Richard L. Johnson and
outraging his daughter, Jeanette. These four men, Berrell Jones, Moses
Johnson, Jim and John Packer, none of them twenty-five years of age, upon
this conclusion, were taken from jail, hanged, shot, and burned while yet
alive the night of Oct. 12. The same report says Mr. Johnson was on the
best of terms with his Negro tenants.

The race thus outraged must find out the facts of this awful hurling of
men into eternity on supposition, and give them to the indifferent and
apathetic country. We feel this to be a garbled report, but how can we
prove it?

Near Vicksburg, Miss., a murder was committed by a gang of burglars. Of
course it must have been done by Negroes, and Negroes were arrested for
it. It is believed that two men, Smith Tooley and John Adams belonged to a
gang controlled by white men and, fearing exposure, on the night of July
4, they were hanged in the Court House yard by those interested in
silencing them. Robberies since committed in the same vicinity have been
known to be by white men who had their faces blackened. We strongly
believe in the innocence of these murdered men, but we have no proof. No
other news goes out to the world save that which stamps us as a race of
cutthroats, robbers and lustful wild beasts. So great is Southern hate and
prejudice, they legally(?) hung poor little thirteen-year-old Mildrey
Brown at Columbia, S.C., Oct. 7, on the circumstantial evidence that she
poisoned a white infant. If her guilt had been proven unmistakably, had
she been white, Mildrey Brown would never have been hung.

The country would have been aroused and South Carolina disgraced forever
for such a crime. The Afro-American himself did not know as he should have
known as his journals should be in a position to have him know and act.

Nothing is more definitely settled than he must act for himself. I have
shown how he may employ the boycott, emigration and the press, and I feel
that by a combination of all these agencies can be effectually stamped out
lynch law, that last relic of barbarism and slavery. "The gods help those
who help themselves."


PREFACE

HON. FREDERICK DOUGLASS'S LETTER

DEAR MISS WELLS:

Let me give you thanks for your faithful paper on the lynch abomination
now generally practiced against colored people in the South. There has
been no word equal to it in convincing power. I have spoken, but my word
is feeble in comparison. You give us what you know and testify from actual
knowledge. You have dealt with the facts with cool, painstaking fidelity,
and left those naked and uncontradicted facts to speak for themselves.

Brave woman! you have done your people and mine a service which can
neither be weighed nor measured. If the American conscience were only half
alive, if the American church and clergy were only half Christianized, if
American moral sensibility were not hardened by persistent infliction of
outrage and crime against colored people, a scream of horror, shame, and
indignation would rise to Heaven wherever your pamphlet shall be read.

But alas! even crime has power to reproduce itself and create conditions
favorable to its own existence. It sometimes seems we are deserted by
earth and Heaven--yet we must still think, speak and work, and trust in
the power of a merciful God for final deliverance.

Very truly and gratefully yours,
FREDERICK DOUGLASS
Cedar Hill, Anacostia, D.C.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1
The Case Stated      57

CHAPTER 2
Lynch-Law Statistics      65

CHAPTER 3
Lynching Imbeciles      73

CHAPTER 4
Lynching of Innocent Men      84

CHAPTER 5
Lynched for Anything or Nothing      93

CHAPTER 6
History of Some Cases of Rape      108

CHAPTER 7
The Crusade Justified      121

CHAPTER 8
Miss Willard's Attitude      129

CHAPTER 9
Lynching Record for 1894      139

CHAPTER 10
The Remedy      147




1

THE CASE STATED


The student of American sociology will find the year 1894 marked by a
pronounced awakening of the public conscience to a system of anarchy and
outlawry which had grown during a series of ten years to be so common,
that scenes of unusual brutality failed to have any visible effect upon
the humane sentiments of the people of our land.

Beginning with the emancipation of the Negro, the inevitable result of
unbribled power exercised for two and a half centuries, by the white man
over the Negro, began to show itself in acts of conscienceless outlawry.
During the slave regime, the Southern white man owned the Negro body and
soul. It was to his interest to dwarf the soul and preserve the body.
Vested with unlimited power over his slave, to subject him to any and all
kinds of physical punishment, the white man was still restrained from such
punishment as tended to injure the slave by abating his physical powers
and thereby reducing his financial worth. While slaves were scourged
mercilessly, and in countless cases inhumanly treated in other respects,
still the white owner rarely permitted his anger to go so far as to take a
life, which would entail upon him a loss of several hundred dollars. The
slave was rarely killed, he was too valuable; it was easier and quite as
effective, for discipline or revenge, to sell him "Down South."

But Emancipation came and the vested interests of the white man in the
Negro's body were lost. The white man had no right to scourge the
emancipated Negro, still less has he a right to kill him. But the Southern
white people had been educated so long in that school of practice, in
which might makes right, that they disdained to draw strict lines of
action in dealing with the Negro. In slave times the Negro was kept
subservient and submissive by the frequency and severity of the scourging,
but, with freedom, a new system of intimidation came into vogue; the Negro
was not only whipped and scourged; he was killed.

Not all nor nearly all of the murders done by white men, during the past
thirty years in the South, have come to light, but the statistics as
gathered and preserved by white men, and which have not been questioned,
show that during these years more than ten thousand Negroes have been
killed in cold blood, without the formality of judicial trial and legal
execution. And yet, as evidence of the absolute impunity with which the
white man dares to kill a Negro, the same record shows that during all
these years, and for all these murders only three white men have been
tried, convicted, and executed. As no white man has been lynched for the
murder of colored people, these three executions are the only instances of
the death penalty being visited upon white men for murdering Negroes.

Naturally enough the commission of these crimes began to tell upon the
public conscience, and the Southern white man, as a tribute to the
nineteenth-century civilization, was in a manner compelled to give excuses
for his barbarism. His excuses have adapted themselves to the emergency,
and are aptly outlined by that greatest of all Negroes, Frederick
Douglass, in an article of recent date, in which he shows that there have
been three distinct eras of Southern barbarism, to account for which three
distinct excuses have been made.

The first excuse given to the civilized world for the murder of
unoffending Negroes was the necessity of the white man to repress and
stamp out alleged "race riots." For years immediately succeeding the war
there was an appalling slaughter of colored people, and the wires usually
conveyed to northern people and the world the intelligence, first, that an
insurrection was being planned by Negroes, which, a few hours later, would
prove to have been vigorously resisted by white men, and controlled with a
resulting loss of several killed and wounded. It was always a remarkable
feature in these insurrections and riots that only Negroes were killed
during the rioting, and that all the white men escaped unharmed.

From 1865 to 1872, hundreds of colored men and women were mercilessly
murdered and the almost invariable reason assigned was that they met their
death by being alleged participants in an insurrection or riot. But this
story at last wore itself out. No insurrection ever materialized; no
Negro rioter was ever apprehended and proven guilty, and no dynamite ever
recorded the black man's protest against oppression and wrong. It was too
much to ask thoughtful people to believe this transparent story, and the
southern white people at last made up their minds that some other excuse
must be had.

Then came the second excuse, which had its birth during the turbulent
times of reconstruction. By an amendment to the Constitution the Negro was
given the right of franchise, and, theoretically at least, his ballot
became his invaluable emblem of citizenship. In a government "of the
people, for the people, and by the people," the Negro's vote became an
important factor in all matters of state and national politics. But this
did not last long. The southern white man would not consider that the
Negro had any right which a white man was bound to respect, and the idea
of a republican form of government in the southern states grew into
general contempt. It was maintained that "This is a white man's
government," and regardless of numbers the white man should rule. "No
Negro domination" became the new legend on the sanguinary banner of the
sunny South, and under it rode the Ku Klux Klan, the Regulators, and the
lawless mobs, which for any cause chose to murder one man or a dozen as
suited their purpose best. It was a long, gory campaign; the blood chills
and the heart almost loses faith in Christianity when one thinks of Yazoo,
Hamburg, Edgefield, Copiah, and the countless massacres of defenseless
Negroes, whose only crime was the attempt to exercise their right to vote.

But it was a bootless strife for colored people. The government which had
made the Negro a citizen found itself unable to protect him. It gave him
the right to vote, but denied him the protection which should have
maintained that right. Scourged from his home; hunted through the swamps;
hung by midnight raiders, and openly murdered in the light of day, the
Negro clung to his right of franchise with a heroism which would have
wrung admiration from the hearts of savages. He believed that in that
small white ballot there was a subtle something which stood for manhood as
well as citizenship, and thousands of brave black men went to their
graves, exemplifying the one by dying for the other.

The white man's victory soon became complete by fraud, violence,
intimidation and murder. The franchise vouchsafed to the Negro grew to be
a "barren ideality," and regardless of numbers, the colored people found
themselves voiceless in the councils of those whose duty it was to rule.
With no longer the fear of "Negro Domination" before their eyes, the
white man's second excuse became valueless. With the Southern governments
all subverted and the Negro actually eliminated from all participation in
state and national elections, there could be no longer an excuse for
killing Negroes to prevent "Negro Domination."

Brutality still continued; Negroes were whipped, scourged, exiled, shot
and hung whenever and wherever it pleased the white man so to treat them,
and as the civilized world with increasing persistency held the white
people of the South to account for its outlawry, the murderers invented
the third excuse--that Negroes had to be killed to avenge their assaults
upon women. There could be framed no possible excuse more harmful to the
Negro and more unanswerable if true in its sufficiency for the white man.

Humanity abhors the assailant of womanhood, and this charge upon the Negro
at once placed him beyond the pale of human sympathy. With such unanimity,
earnestness and apparent candor was this charge made and reiterated that
the world has accepted the story that the Negro is a monster which the
Southern white man has painted him. And today, the Christian world feels,
that while lynching is a crime, and lawlessness and anarchy the certain
precursors of a nation's fall, it can not by word or deed, extend sympathy
or help to a race of outlaws, who might mistake their plea for justice and
deem it an excuse for their continued wrongs.

The Negro has suffered much and is willing to suffer more. He recognizes
that the wrongs of two centuries can not be righted in a day, and he tries
to bear his burden with patience for today and be hopeful for tomorrow.
But there comes a time when the veriest worm will turn, and the Negro
feels today that after all the work he has done, all the sacrifices he has
made, and all the suffering he has endured, if he did not, now, defend his
name and manhood from this vile accusation, he would be unworthy even of
the contempt of mankind. It is to this charge he now feels he must make
answer.

If the Southern people in defense of their lawlessness, would tell the
truth and admit that colored men and women are lynched for almost any
offense, from murder to a misdemeanor, there would not now be the
necessity for this defense. But when they intentionally, maliciously and
constantly belie the record and bolster up these falsehoods by the words
of legislators, preachers, governors and bishops, then the Negro must give
to the world his side of the awful story.

A word as to the charge itself. In considering the third reason assigned
by the Southern white people for the butchery of blacks, the question must
be asked, what the white man means when he charges the black man with
rape. Does he mean the crime which the statutes of the civilized states
describe as such? Not by any means. With the Southern white man, any
mesalliance existing between a white woman and a colored man is a
sufficient foundation for the charge of rape. The Southern white man says
that it is impossible for a voluntary alliance to exist between a white
woman and a colored man, and therefore, the fact of an alliance is a proof
of force. In numerous instances where colored men have have been lynched
on the charge of rape, it was positively known at the time of lynching,
and indisputably proven after the victim's death, that the relationship
sustained between the man and woman was voluntary and clandestine, and
that in no court of law could even the charge of assault have been
successfully maintained.

It was for the assertion of this fact, in the defense of her own race,
that the writer hereof became an exile; her property destroyed and her
return to her home forbidden under penalty of death, for writing the
following editorial which was printed in her paper, the _Free Speech,_ in
Memphis, Tenn., May 21,1892:

  Eight Negroes lynched since last issue of the _Free Speech_ one at
  Little Rock, Ark., last Saturday morning where the citizens broke(?)
  into the penitentiary and got their man; three near Anniston, Ala., one
  near New Orleans; and three at Clarksville, Ga., the last three for
  killing a white man, and five on the same old racket--the new alarm
  about raping white women. The same programme of hanging, then shooting
  bullets into the lifeless bodies was carried out to the letter. Nobody
  in this section of the country believes the old threadbare lie that
  Negro men rape white women. If Southern white men are not careful, they
  will overreach themselves and public sentiment will have a reaction; a
  conclusion will then be reached which will be very damaging to the moral
  reputation of their women.

But threats cannot suppress the truth, and while the Negro suffers the
soul deformity, resultant from two and a half centuries of slavery, he is
no more guilty of this vilest of all vile charges than the white man who
would blacken his name.

During all the years of slavery, no such charge was ever made, not even
during the dark days of the rebellion, when the white man, following the
fortunes of war went to do battle for the maintenance of slavery. While
the master was away fighting to forge the fetters upon the slave, he left
his wife and children with no protectors save the Negroes themselves. And
yet during those years of trust and peril, no Negro proved recreant to his
trust and no white man returned to a home that had been dispoiled.

Likewise during the period of alleged "insurrection," and alarming "race
riots," it never occurred to the white man, that his wife and children
were in danger of assault. Nor in the Reconstruction era, when the hue and
cry was against "Negro Domination," was there ever a thought that the
domination would ever contaminate a fireside or strike to death the virtue
of womanhood. It must appear strange indeed, to every thoughtful and
candid man, that more than a quarter of a century elapsed before the Negro
began to show signs of such infamous degeneration.

In his remarkable apology for lynching, Bishop Haygood, of Georgia, says:
"No race, not the most savage, tolerates the rape of woman, but it may be
said without reflection upon any other people that the Southern people are
now and always have been most sensitive concerning the honor of their
women--their mothers, wives, sisters and daughters." It is not the purpose
of this defense to say one word against the white women of the South. Such
need not be said, but it is their misfortune that the chivalrous white men
of that section, in order to escape the deserved execration of the
civilized world, should shield themselves by their cowardly and infamously
false excuse, and call into question that very honor about which their
distinguished priestly apologist claims they are most sensitive. To
justify their own barbarism they assume a chivalry which they do not
possess. True chivalry respects all womanhood, and no one who reads the
record, as it is written in the faces of the million mulattoes in the
South, will for a minute conceive that the southern white man had a very
chivalrous regard for the honor due the women of his own race or respect
for the womanhood which circumstances placed in his power. That chivalry
which is "most sensitive concerning the honor of women" can hope for but
little respect from the civilized world, when it confines itself entirely
to the women who happen to be white. Virtue knows no color line, and the
chivalry which depends upon complexion of skin and texture of hair can
command no honest respect.

When emancipation came to the Negroes, there arose in the northern part of
the United States an almost divine sentiment among the noblest, purest
and best white women of the North, who felt called to a mission to educate
and Christianize the millions of southern exslaves. From every nook and
corner of the North, brave young white women answered that call and left
their cultured homes, their happy associations and their lives of ease,
and with heroic determination went to the South to carry light and truth
to the benighted blacks. It was a heroism no less than that which calls
for volunteers for India, Africa and the Isles of the sea. To educate
their unfortunate charges; to teach them the Christian virtues and to
inspire in them the moral sentiments manifest in their own lives, these
young women braved dangers whose record reads more like fiction than fact.
They became social outlaws in the South. The peculiar sensitiveness of the
southern white men for women, never shed its protecting influence about
them. No friendly word from their own race cheered them in their work; no
hospitable doors gave them the companionship like that from which they had
come. No chivalrous white man doffed his hat in honor or respect. They
were "Nigger teachers"--unpardonable offenders in the social ethics of the
South, and were insulted, persecuted and ostracised, not by Negroes, but
by the white manhood which boasts of its chivalry toward women.

And yet these northern women worked on, year after year, unselfishly, with
a heroism which amounted almost to martyrdom. Threading their way through
dense forests, working in schoolhouse, in the cabin and in the church,
thrown at all times and in all places among the unfortunate and lowly
Negroes, whom they had come to find and to serve, these northern women,
thousands and thousands of them, have spent more than a quarter of a
century in giving to the colored people their splendid lessons for home
and heart and soul. Without protection, save that which innocence gives to
every good woman, they went about their work, fearing no assault and
suffering none. Their chivalrous protectors were hundreds of miles away in
their northern homes, and yet they never feared any "great dark-faced
mobs," they dared night or day to "go beyond their own roof trees." They
never complained of assaults, and no mob was ever called into existence to
avenge crimes against them. Before the world adjudges the Negro a moral
monster, a vicious assailant of womanhood and a menace to the sacred
precincts of home, the colored people ask the consideration of the silent
record of gratitude, respect, protection and devotion of the millions of
the race in the South, to the thousands of northern white women who have
served as teachers and missionaries since the war.

The Negro may not have known what chivalry was, but he knew enough to
preserve inviolate the womanhood of the South which was entrusted to his
hands during the war. The finer sensibilities of his soul may have been
crushed out by years of slavery, but his heart was full of gratitude to
the white women of the North, who blessed his home and inspired his soul
in all these years of freedom. Faithful to his trust in both of these
instances, he should now have the impartial ear of the civilized world,
when he dares to speak for himself as against the infamy wherewith he
stands charged.

It is his regret, that, in his own defense, he must disclose to the world
that degree of dehumanizing brutality which fixes upon America the blot of
a national crime. Whatever faults and failings other nations may have in
their dealings with their own subjects or with other people, no other
civilized nation stands condemned before the world with a series of crimes
so peculiarly national. It becomes a painful duty of the Negro to
reproduce a record which shows that a large portion of the American people
avow anarchy, condone murder and defy the contempt of civilization. These
pages are written in no spirit of vindictiveness, for all who give the
subject consideration must concede that far too serious is the condition
of that civilized government in which the spirit of unrestrained outlawry
constantly increases in violence, and casts its blight over a continually
growing area of territory. We plead not for the colored people alone, but
for all victims of the terrible injustice which puts men and women to
death without form of law. During the year 1894, there were 132 persons
executed in the United States by due form of law, while in the same year,
197 persons were put to death by mobs who gave the victims no opportunity
to make a lawful defense. No comment need be made upon a condition of
public sentiment responsible for such alarming results.

The purpose of the pages which follow shall be to give the record which
has been made, not by colored men, but that which is the result of
compilations made by white men, of reports sent over the civilized world
by white men in the South. Out of their own mouths shall the murderers be
condemned. For a number of years the _Chicago Tribune_, admittedly one of
the leading journals of America, has made a specialty of the compilation
of statistics touching upon lynching. The data compiled by that journal
and published to the world January 1, 1894, up to the present time has not
been disputed. In order to be safe from the charge of exaggeration, the
incidents hereinafter reported have been confined to those vouched for by
the Tribune.




2

LYNCH-LAW STATISTICS


From the record published in the _Chicago Tribune_, January 1, 1894, the
following computation of lynching statistics is made referring only to the
colored victims of Lynch Law during the year 1893:

ARSON

Sept. 15, Paul Hill, Carrollton, Ala.; Sept. 15, Paul Archer, Carrollton,
Ala.; Sept. 15, William Archer, Carrollton, Ala.; Sept. 15, Emma Fair,
Carrollton, Ala.


SUSPECTED ROBBERY

Dec. 23, unknown negro, Fannin, Miss.


ASSAULT

Dec. 25, Calvin Thomas, near Brainbridge, Ga.


ATTEMPTED ASSAULT

Dec. 28, Tillman Green, Columbia, La.


INCENDIARISM

Jan. 26, Patrick Wells, Quincy, Fla.; Feb. 9, Frank Harrell, Dickery,
Miss.; Feb. 9, William Filder, Dickery, Miss.


ATTEMPTED RAPE

Feb. 21, Richard Mays, Springville, Mo.; Aug. 14, Dug Hazleton,
Carrollton, Ga.; Sept. 1, Judge McNeil, Cadiz, Ky.; Sept. 11, Frank Smith,
Newton, Miss.; Sept. 16, William Jackson, Nevada, Mo.; Sept. 19, Riley
Gulley, Pine Apple, Ala.; Oct. 9, John Davis, Shorterville, Ala.; Nov. 8,
Robert Kennedy, Spartansburg, S.C.


BURGLARY

Feb. 16, Richard Forman, Granada, Miss.


WIFE BEATING

Oct. 14, David Jackson, Covington, La.


ATTEMPTED MURDER

Sept. 21, Thomas Smith, Roanoke, Va.


ATTEMPTED ROBBERY

Dec. 12, four unknown negroes, near Selma, Ala.


RACE PREJUDICE

Jan. 30, Thomas Carr, Kosciusko, Miss.; Feb. 7, William Butler, Hickory
Creek, Texas; Aug. 27, Charles Tart, Lyons Station, Miss.; Dec. 7, Robert
Greenwood, Cross county, Ark.; July 14, Allen Butler, Lawrenceville, Ill.


THIEVES

Oct. 24, two unknown negroes, Knox Point, La.


ALLEGED BARN BURNING

Nov. 4, Edward Wagner, Lynchburg, Va.; Nov. 4, William Wagner, Lynchburg,
Va.; Nov. 4, Samuel Motlow, Lynchburg, Va.; Nov. 4, Eliza Motlow,
Lynchburg, Va.


ALLEGED MURDER

Jan. 21, Robert Landry, St. James Parish, La.; Jan. 21, Chicken George,
St. James Parish, La.; Jan. 21, Richard Davis, St. James Parish, La.; Dec.
8, Benjamin Menter, Berlin, Ala.; Dec. 8, Robert Wilkins, Berlin, Ala.;
Dec. 8, Joseph Gevhens, Berlin, Ala.


ALLEGED COMPLICITY IN MURDER

Sept. 16, Valsin Julian, Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept. 16, Basil Julian,
Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept. 16, Paul Julian, Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept.
16, John Willis, Jefferson Parish, La.


MURDER

June 29, Samuel Thorp, Savannah, Ga.; June 29, George S. Riechen,
Waynesboro, Ga.; June 30, Joseph Bird, Wilberton, I.T.; July 1, James
Lamar, Darien, Ga.; July 28, Henry Miller, Dallas, Texas; July 28, Ada
Hiers, Walterboro, S.C.; July 28, Alexander Brown, Bastrop, Texas; July
30, W.G. Jamison, Quincy, Ill.; Sept. 1, John Ferguson, Lawrens, S.C.;
Sept. 1, Oscar Johnston, Berkeley, S.C.; Sept. 1, Henry Ewing, Berkeley,
S.C.; Sept. 8, William Smith, Camden, Ark.; Sept. 15, Staples Green,
Livingston, Ala.; Sept. 29, Hiram Jacobs, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29,
Lucien Mannet, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29, Hire Bevington, Mount Vernon,
Ga.; Sept. 29, Weldon Gordon, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29, Parse
Strickland, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Oct. 20, William Dalton, Cartersville, Ga.;
Oct. 27, M.B. Taylor, Wise Court House, Va.; Oct. 27, Isaac Williams,
Madison, Ga.; Nov. 10, Miller Davis, Center Point, Ark.; Nov. 14, John
Johnston, Auburn, N.Y.

Sept. 27, Calvin Stewart, Langley, S.C.; Sept. 29, Henry Coleman, Denton,
La.; Oct. 18, William Richards, Summerfield, Ga.; Oct. 18, James Dickson,
Summerfield, Ga.; Oct. 27, Edward Jenkins, Clayton county, Ga.; Nov. 9,
Henry Boggs, Fort White, Fla.; Nov. 14, three unknown negroes, Lake City
Junction, Fla.; Nov. 14, D.T. Nelson, Varney, Ark.; Nov. 29, Newton Jones,
Baxley, Ga.; Dec. 2, Lucius Holt, Concord, Ga.; Dec. 10, two unknown
negroes, Richmond, Ala.; July 12, Henry Fleming, Columbus, Miss.; July 17,
unknown negro, Briar Field, Ala.; July 18, Meredith Lewis, Roseland, La.
July 29, Edward Bill, Dresden, Tenn.; Aug. 1, Henry Reynolds, Montgomery,
Tenn.; Aug. 9, unknown negro, McCreery, Ark.; Aug. 12, unknown negro,
Brantford, Fla.; Aug. 18, Charles Walton, Morganfield, Ky; Aug. 21,
Charles Tait, near Memphis, Tenn.; Aug. 28, Leonard Taylor, New Castle,
Ky; Sept. 8, Benjamin Jackson, Quincy, Miss.; Sept. 14, John Williams,
Jackson, Tenn.


SELF-DEFENSE

July 30, unknown negro, Wingo, Ky.


POISONING WELLS

Aug. 18, two unknown negroes, Franklin Parish, La.


ALLEGED WELL POISONING

Sept. 15, Benjamin Jackson, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, Mahala Jackson,
Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, Louisa Carter, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, W.A.
Haley, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 16, Rufus Bigley, Jackson, Miss.


INSULTING WHITES

Feb. 18, John Hughes, Moberly, Mo.; June 2, Isaac Lincoln, Fort Madison,
S.C.


MURDEROUS ASSAULT

April 20, Daniel Adams, Selina, Kan.


NO OFFENSE

July 21, Charles Martin, Shelby Co., Tenn.; July 30, William Steen, Paris,
Miss.; Aug. 31, unknown negro, Yarborough, Tex.; Sept. 30, unknown negro,
Houston, Tex.; Dec. 28, Mack Segars, Brantley, Ala.


ALLEGED RAPE

July 7, Charles T. Miller, Bardwell, Ky.; Aug. 10, Daniel Lewis, Waycross,
Ga.; Aug. 10, James Taylor, Waycross, Ga.; Aug. 10, John Chambers,
Waycross, Ga.


ALLEGED STOCK POISONING

Dec. 16, Henry G. Givens, Nebro, Ky.


SUSPECTED MURDER

Dec. 23, Sloan Allen, West Mississippi.


SUSPICION OF RAPE

Feb. 14, Andy Blount, Chattanooga, Tenn.


TURNING STATE'S EVIDENCE

Dec. 19, William Ferguson, Adele, Ga.


RAPE

Jan. 19, James Williams, Pickens Co., Ala.; Feb. 11, unknown negro, Forest
Hill, Tenn.; Feb. 26, Joseph Hayne, or Paine, Jellico, Tenn.; Nov. 1,
Abner Anthony, Hot Springs, Va.; Nov. 1, Thomas Hill, Spring Place, Ga.;
April 24, John Peterson, Denmark, S.C.; May 6, Samuel Gaillard, ----,
S.C.; May 10, Haywood Banks, or Marksdale, Columbia, S.C.; May 12, Israel
Halliway, Napoleonville, La.; May 12, unknown negro, Wytheville, Va.; May
31, John Wallace, Jefferson Springs, Ark.; June 3, Samuel Bush, Decatur,
Ill.; June 8, L.C. Dumas, Gleason, Tenn.; June 13, William Shorter,
Winchester, Va.; June 14, George Williams, near Waco, Tex.; June 24,
Daniel Edwards, Selina or Selma, Ala.; June 27, Ernest Murphy, Daleville,
Ala.; July 6, unknown negro, Poplar Head, La.; July 6, unknown negro,
Poplar Head, La.; July 12, Robert Larkin, Oscola, Tex.; July 17, Warren
Dean, Stone Creek, Ga.; July 21, unknown negro, Brantford, Fla.; July 17,
John Cotton, Connersville, Ark.; July 22, Lee Walker, New Albany, Miss.;
July 26, ---- Handy, Suansea, S.C.; July 30, William Thompson, Columbia,
S.C.; July 28, Isaac Harper, Calera, Ala.; July 30, Thomas Preston,
Columbia, S.C.; July 30, Handy Kaigler, Columbia, S.C.; Aug. 13, Monroe
Smith, Springfield, Ala.; Aug. 19, negro tramp, near Paducah, Ky.; Aug.
21, John Nilson, near Leavenworth, Kan.; Aug. 23, Jacob Davis, Green Wood,
S.C.; Sept. 2, William Arkinson, McKenney, Ky.; Sept. 16, unknown negro,
Centerville, Ala.; Sept. 16, Jessie Mitchell, Amelia C.H., Va.; Sept. 25,
Perry Bratcher, New Boston, Tex.; Oct. 9, William Lacey, Jasper, Ala.;
Oct. 22, John Gamble, Pikesville, Tenn.


OFFENSES CHARGED ARE AS FOLLOWS

Rape, 39; attempted rape, 8; alleged rape, 4; suspicion of rape, 1;
murder, 44; alleged murder, 6; alleged complicity in murder, 4; murderous
assault, 1; attempted murder, 1; attempted robbery, 4; arson, 4;
incendiarism, 3; alleged stock poisoning, 1; poisoning wells, 2; alleged
poisoning wells, 5; burglary, 1; wife beating, 1; self-defense, 1;
suspected robbery, 1; assault and battery, 1; insulting whites, 2;
malpractice, 1; alleged barn burning, 4; stealing, 2; unknown offense, 4;
no offense, 1; race prejudice, 4; total, 159.


LYNCHINGS BY STATES

Alabama, 25; Arkansas, 7; Florida, 7; Georgia, 24; Indian Territory, 1;
Illinois, 3; Kansas, 2; Kentucky, 8; Louisiana, 18; Mississippi, 17;
Missouri, 3; New York, 1; South Carolina, 15; Tennessee, 10; Texas, 8;
Virginia, 10.


RECORD FOR THE YEAR 1892

While it is intended that the record here presented shall include
specially the lynchings of 1893, it will not be amiss to give the record
for the year preceding. The facts contended for will always appear
manifest--that not one-third of the victims lynched were charged with
rape, and further that the charges made embraced a range of offenses from
murders to misdemeanors.

In 1892 there were 241 persons lynched. The entire number is divided among
the following states:

Alabama, 22; Arkansas, 25; California, 3; Florida, 11; Georgia, 17; Idaho,
8; Illinois, 1; Kansas, 3; Kentucky, 9; Louisiana, 29; Maryland, 1;
Mississippi, 16; Missouri, 6; Montana, 4; New York, 1; North Carolina, 5;
North Dakota, 1; Ohio, 3; South Carolina, 5; Tennessee, 28; Texas, 15;
Virginia, 7; West Virginia, 5; Wyoming, 9; Arizona Territory, 3; Oklahoma,
2.

Of this number 160 were of Negro descent. Four of them were lynched in New
York, Ohio and Kansas; the remainder were murdered in the South. Five of
this number were females. The charges for which they were lynched cover a
wide range. They are as follows:

Rape, 46; murder, 58; rioting, 3; race prejudice, 6; no cause given, 4;
incendiarism, 6; robbery, 6; assault and battery, 1; attempted rape, 11;
suspected robbery, 4; larceny, 1; self-defense, 1; insulting women, 2;
desperadoes, 6; fraud, 1; attempted murder, 2; no offense stated, boy and
girl, 2.

In the case of the boy and girl above referred to, their father, named
Hastings, was accused of the murder of a white man; his fourteen-year-old
daughter and sixteen-year-old son were hanged and their bodies filled with
bullets, then the father was also lynched. This was in November, 1892, at
Jonesville, Louisiana.




3

LYNCHING IMBECILES

_(An Arkansas Butchery)_


The only excuse which capital punishment attempts to find is upon the
theory that the criminal is past the power of reformation and his life is
a constant menace to the community. If, however, he is mentally
unbalanced, irresponsible for his acts, there can be no more inhuman act
conceived of than the wilful sacrifice of his life. So thoroughly is that
principle grounded in the law, that all civilized society surrounds human
life with a safeguard, which prevents the execution of a criminal who is
insane, even if sane at the time of his criminal act. Should he become
insane after its commission the law steps in and protects him during the
period of his insanity. But Lynch Law has no such regard for human life.
Assuming for itself an absolute supremacy over the law of the land, it has
time and again dyed its hands in the blood of men who were imbeciles. Two
or three noteworthy cases will suffice to show with what inhuman ferocity
irresponsible men have been put to death by this system of injustice.

An instance occurred during the year 1892 in Arkansas, a report of which
is given in full in the _Arkansas Democrat_, published at Little Rock, in
that state, on the eleventh day of February of that year. The paper
mentioned is perhaps one of the leading weeklies in that state and the
account given in detail has every mark of a careful and conscientious
investigation. The victims of this tragedy were a colored man, named Hamp
Biscoe, his wife and a thirteen-year-old son. Hamp Biscoe, it appears, was
a hard working, thrifty farmer, who lived near England, Arkansas, upon a
small farm with his family. The investigation of the tragedy was
conducted by a resident of Arkansas named R.B. Caries, a white man, who
furnished the account to the _Arkansas Democrat_ over his own signature.
He says the original trouble which led to the lynching was a quarrel
between Biscoe and a white man about a debt. About six years after Biscoe
preempted his land, a white man made a demand of $100 upon him for
services in showing him the land and making the sale. Biscoe denied the
service and refused to pay the demand. The white man, however, brought
suit, obtained judgment for the hundred dollars and Biscoe's farm was sold
to pay the judgment.

The suit, judgment and subsequent legal proceedings appear to have driven
Biscoe almost crazy and brooding over his wrongs he grew to be a confirmed
imbecile. He would allow but few men, white or colored, to come upon his
place, as he suspected every stranger to be planning to steal his farm. A
week preceding the tragedy, a white man named Venable, whose farm adjoined
Biscoe's, let down the fence and proceeded to drive through Biscoe's
field. The latter saw him; grew very excited, cursed him and drove him
from his farm with bitter oaths and violent threats. Venable went away and
secured a warrant for Biscoe's arrest. This warrant was placed in the
hands of a constable named John Ford, who took a colored deputy and two
white men out to Biscoe's farm to make the arrest. When they arrived at
the house Biscoe refused to be arrested and warned them he would shoot if
they persisted in their attempt to arrest him. The warning was unheeded by
Ford, who entered upon the premises, when Biscoe, true to his word, fired
upon him. The load tore a part of his clothes from his body, one shot
going through his arm and entering his breast. After he had fallen, Ford
drew his revolver and shot Biscoe in the head and his wife through the
arm. The Negro deputy then began firing and struck Biscoe in the small of
the back. Ford's wound was not dangerous and in a few days he was able to
be around again. Biscoe, however, was so severely shot that he was unable
to stand after the firing was over.

Two other white men hearing the exchange of shots went to the rescue of
the officers, forced open the door of Biscoe's cabin and arrested him, his
wife and thirteen-year-old son, and took them, together with a babe at the
breast, to a small frame house near the depot and put them under guard.
The subsequent proceedings were briefly told by Mr. Carlee in the columns
of the _Arkansas Democrat_ above mentioned, from whose account the
following excerpt is taken:

  It was rumored here that the Negroes were to be lynched that night, but
  I do not think it was generally credited, as it was not believed that
  Ford was greatly hurt and the Negro was held to be fatally injured and
  crazy at that. But that night, about 8 o'clock, a party of perhaps
  twelve or fifteen men, a number of whom were known to the guards, came
  to the house and told the Negro guards they would take care of the
  prisoners now, and for them to leave; as they did not obey at once they
  were persuaded to leave with words that did not admit of delay.

  The woman began to cry and said, "You intend to kill us to get our
  money." They told her to hush (she was heavy with child and had a child
  at her breast) as they intended to give her a nice present. The guards
  heard no more, but hastened to a Negro church near by and urged the
  preacher to go up and stop the mob. A few minutes after, the shooting
  began, perhaps about forty shots being fired. The white men then left
  rapidly and the Negroes went to the house. Hamp Biscoe and his wife were
  killed, the baby had a slight wound across the upper lip; the boy was
  still alive and lived until after midnight, talking rationally and
  telling who did the shooting.

  He said when they came in and shot his father, he attempted to run out
  of doors and a young man shot him in the bowels and that he fell. He saw
  another man shoot his mother and a taller young man, whom he did not
  know, shoot his father. After they had killed them, the young man who
  had shot his mother pulled off her stockings and took $220 in currency
  that she had hid there. The men then came to the door where the boy was
  lying and one of them turned him over and put his pistol to his breast
  and shot him again. This is the story the dying boy told as near as I
  can get it. It is quite singular that the guards and those who had
  conversed with him were not required to testify. The woman was known to
  have the money as she had exposed it that day. She also had $36 in
  silver, which the plunderer of the body did not get. The Negro was
  undoubtedly insane and had been for several years. The citizens of this
  community condemn the murder and have no sympathy with it. The Negro was
  a well-to-do farmer, but had become crazed because he was convinced some
  plot had been made to steal his land and only a few days ago declared
  that he expected to die in defense of his home in a short time and he
  did not care how soon. The killing of a woman with the child at her
  breast and in her condition, and also a young boy, was extremely brutal.
  As for Hamp Biscoe he was dangerous and should long have been confined
  in the insane asylum. Such were the facts as near as I can get them and
  you can use them as you see fit, but I would prefer you would suppress
  the names charged by the Negroes with the killing.

Perhaps the civilized world will think, that with all these facts laid
before the public, by a writer who signs his name to his communication, in
a land where grand juries are sworn to investigate, where judges and
juries are sworn to administer the law and sheriffs are paid to execute
the decrees of the courts, and where, in fact, every instrument of
civilization is supposed to work for the common good of all citizens, that
this matter was duly investigated, the criminals apprehended and the
punishment meted out to the murderers. But this is a mistake; nothing of
the kind was done or attempted. Six months after the publication, above
referred to, an investigator, writing to find out what had been done in
the matter, received the following reply:

  OFFICE OF
  S.S. GLOVER,
  SHERIFF AND COLLECTOR,
  LONOKE COUNTY.

  Lonoke, Ark., 9-12-1892

  Geo. Washington, Esq.,
  Chicago, Ill.

  DEAR SIR:--The parties who killed Hamp Briscoe February the ninth, have
  never been arrested. The parties are still in the county. It was done by
  some of the citizens, and those who know will not tell.

  S.S. GLOVER, Sheriff

Thus acts the mob with the victim of its fury, conscious that it will
never be called to an account. Not only is this true, but the moral
support of those who are chosen by the people to execute the law, is
frequently given to the support of lawlessness and mob violence. The press
and even the pulpit, in the main either by silence or open apology, have
condoned and encouraged this state of anarchy.


TORTURED AND BURNED IN TEXAS

Never In the history of civilization has any Christian people stooped to
such shocking brutality and indescribable barbarism as that which
characterized the people of Paris, Texas, and adjacent communities on the
first of February, 1893. The cause of this awful outbreak of human passion
was the murder of a four-year-old child, daughter of a man named Vance.
This man, Vance, had been a police officer in Paris for years, and was
known to be a man of bad temper, overbearing manner and given to harshly
treating the prisoners under his care. He had arrested Smith and, it is
said, cruelly mistreated him. Whether or not the murder of his child was
an art of fiendish revenge, it has not been shown, but many persons who
know of the incident have suggested that the secret of the attack on the
child lay in a desire for revenge against its father.

In the same town there lived a Negro, named Henry Smith, a well-known
character, a kind of roustabout, who was generally considered a harmless,
weak-minded fellow, not capable of doing any important work, but
sufficiently able to do chores and odd jobs around the houses of the white
people who cared to employ him. A few days before the final tragedy, this
man, Smith, was accused of murdering Myrtle Vance. The crime of murder was
of itself bad enough, and to prove that against Smith would have been
amply sufficient in Texas to have committed him to the gallows, but the
finding of the child so exasperated the father and his friends, that they
at once shamefully exaggerated the facts and declared that the babe had
been ruthlessly assaulted and then killed. The truth was bad enough, but
the white people of the community made it a point to exaggerate every
detail of the awful affair, and to inflame the public mind so that nothing
less than immediate and violent death would satisfy the populace. As a
matter of fact, the child was not brutally assaulted as the world has been
told in excuse for the awful barbarism of that day. Persons who saw the
child after its death, have stated, under the most solemn pledge to truth,
that there was no evidence of such an assault as was published at that
time, only a slight abrasion and discoloration was noticeable and that
mostly about the neck. In spite of this fact, so eminent a man as Bishop
Haygood deliberately and, it must also appear, maliciously falsified the
fact by stating that the child was torn limb from limb, or to quote his
own words, "First outraged with demoniacal cruelty and then taken by her
heels and torn asunder in the mad wantonness of gorilla ferocity."

Nothing is farther from the truth than that statement. It is a
coldblooded, deliberate, brutal falsehood which this Christian(?) Bishop
uses to bolster up the infamous plea that the people of Paris were driven
to insanity by learning that the little child had been viciously
assaulted, choked to death, and then torn to pieces by a demon in human
form. It was a brutal murder, but no more brutal than hundreds of murders
which occur in this country, and which have been equalled every year in
fiendishness and brutality, and for which the death penalty is prescribed
by law and inflicted only after the person has been legally adjudged
guilty of the crime. Those who knew Smith, believe that Vance had at some
time given him cause to seek revenge and that this fearful crime was the
outgrowth of his attempt to avenge himself of some real or fancied wrong.
That the murderer was known as an imbecile, had no effect whatever upon
the people who thirsted for his blood. They determined to make an example
of him and proceeded to carry out their purpose with unspeakably greater
ferocity than that which characterized the half-crazy object of their
revenge.

For a day or so after the child was found in the woods, Smith remained in
the vicinity as if nothing had happened, and when finally becoming aware
that he was suspected, he made an attempt to escape. He was apprehended,
however, not far from the scene of his crime and the news flashed across
the country that the white Christian people of Paris, Texas and the
communities thereabout had deliberately determined to lay aside all forms
of law and inaugurate an entirely new form of punishment for the murder.
They absolutely refused to make any inquiry as to the sanity or insanity
of their prisoner, but set the day and hour when in the presence of
assembled thousands they put their helpless victim to the stake, tortured
him, and then burned him to death for the delectation and satisfaction of
Christian people.

Lest it might be charged that any description of the deeds of that day are
exaggerated, a white man's description which was published in the white
journals of this country is used. The _New York Sun_ of February 2, 1893,
contains an account, from which we make the following excerpt:

  PARIS, Tex., Feb. 1, 1893.--Henry Smith, the negro ravisher of
  four-year-old Myrtle Vance, has expiated in part his awful crime by
  death at the stake. Ever since the perpetration of his awful crime this
  city and the entire surrounding country has been in a wild frenzy of
  excitement. When the news came last night that he had been captured at
  Hope, Ark., that he had been identified by B.B. Sturgeon, James T.
  Hicks, and many other of the Paris searching party, the city was wild
  with joy over the apprehension of the brute. Hundreds of people poured
  into the city from the adjoining country and the word passed from lip
  to lip that the punishment of the fiend should fit the crime that death
  by fire was the penalty Smith should pay for the most atrocious murder
  and terrible outrage in Texas history. Curious and sympathizing alike,
  they came on train and wagons, on horse, and on foot to see if the frail
  mind of a man could think of a way to sufficiently punish the
  perpetrator of so terrible a crime. Whisky shops were closed, unruly
  mobs were dispersed, schools were dismissed by a proclamation from the
  mayor, and everything was done in a business-like manner.


MEETING OF CITIZENS

About 2 o'clock Friday a mass meeting was called at the courthouse and
captains appointed to search for the child. She was found mangled beyond
recognition, covered with leaves and brush as above mentioned. As soon as
it was learned upon the recovery of the body that the crime was so
atrocious the whole town turned out in the chase. The railroads put up
bulletins offering free transportation to all who would join in the
search. Posses went in every direction, and not a stone was left unturned.
Smith was tracked to Detroit on foot, where he jumped on a freight train
and left for his old home in Hempstead county, Arkansas. To this county he
was tracked and yesterday captured at Clow, a flag station on the Arkansas
& Louisiana railway about twenty miles north of Hope. Upon being
questioned the fiend denied everything, but upon being stripped for
examination his undergarments were seen to be spattered with blood and a
part of his shirt was torn off. He was kept under heavy guard at Hope last
night, and later on confessed the crime.

This morning he was brought through Texarkana, where 5,000 people awaited
the train, anxious to see a man who had received the fate of Ed. Coy. At
that place speeches were made by prominent Paris citizens, who asked that
the prisoner be not molested by Texarkana people, but that the guard be
allowed to deliver him up to the outraged and indignant citizens of Paris.
Along the road the train gathered strength from the various towns, the
people crowded upon the platforms and tops of coaches anxious to see the
lynching and the negro who was soon to be delivered to an infuriated mob.


BURNED AT THE STAKE

Arriving here at 12 o'clock the train was met by a surging mass of
humanity 10,000 strong. The negro was placed upon a carnival float in
mockery of a king upon his throne, and, followed by an immense crowd, was
escorted through the city so that all might see the most inhuman monster
known in current history. The line of march was up Main Street to the
square, around the square down Clarksville street to Church Street, thence
to the open prairies about 300 yards from the Texas & Pacific depot. Here
Smith was placed upon a scaffold, six feet square and ten feet high,
securely bound, within the view of all beholders. Here the victim was
tortured for fifty minutes by red-hot iron brands thrust against his
quivering body. Commencing at the feet the brands were placed against him
inch by inch until they were thrust against the face. Then, being
apparently dead, kerosene was poured upon him, cottonseed hulls placed
beneath him and set on fire. In less time than it takes to relate it, the
tortured man was wafted beyond the grave to another fire, hotter and more
terrible than the one just experienced.

Curiosity seekers have carried away already all that was left of the
memorable event, even to pieces of charcoal. The cause of the crime was
that Henry Vance when a deputy policeman, in the course of his duty was
called to arrest Henry Smith for being drunk and disorderly. The Negro was
unruly, and Vance was forced to use his club. The Negro swore vengeance,
and several times assaulted Vance. In his greed for revenge, last
Thursday, he grabbed up the little girl and committed the crime. The
father is prostrated with grief and the mother now lies at death's door,
but she has lived to see the slayer of her innocent babe suffer the most
horrible death that could be conceived.


TORTURE BEYOND DESCRIPTION

Words to describe the awful torture inflicted upon Smith cannot be found.
The Negro, for a long time after starting on the journey to Paris, did not
realize his plight. At last when he was told that he must die by slow
torture he begged for protection. His agony was awful. He pleaded and
writhed in bodily and mental pain. Scarcely had the train reached Paris
than this torture commenced. His clothes were torn off piecemeal and
scattered in the crowd, people catching the shreds and putting them away
as mementos. The child's father, her brother, and two uncles then gathered
about the Negro as he lay fastened to the torture platform and thrust hot
irons into his quivering flesh. It was horrible--the man dying by slow
torture in the midst of smoke from his own burning flesh. Every groan from
the fiend, every contortion of his body was cheered by the thickly packed
crowd of 10,000 persons. The mass of beings 600 yards in diameter, the
scaffold being the center. After burning the feet and legs, the hot
irons--plenty of fresh ones being at hand--were rolled up and down Smith's
stomach, back, and arms. Then the eyes were burned out and irons were
thrust down his throat.

The men of the Vance family having wreaked vengeance, the crowd piled all
kinds of combustible stuff around the scaffold, poured oil on it and set
it afire. The Negro rolled and tossed out of the mass, only to be pushed
back by the people nearest him. He tossed out again, and was roped and
pulled back. Hundreds of people turned away, but the vast crowd still
looked calmly on. People were here from every part of this section. They
came from Dallas, Fort Worth, Sherman, Denison, Bonham, Texarkana, Fort
Smith, Ark., and a party of fifteen came from Hempstead county, Arkansas,
where he was captured. Every train that came in was loaded to its utmost
capacity, and there were demands at many points for special trains to
bring the people here to see the unparalleled punishment for an
unparalleled crime. When the news of the burning went over the country
like wildfire, at every country town anvils boomed forth the announcement.


SHOULD HAVE BEEN IN AN ASYLUM

It may not be amiss in connection with this awful affair, in proof of our
assertion that Smith was an imbecile, to give the testimony of a
well-known colored minister, who lived at Paris, Texas, at the time of the
lynching. He was a witness of the awful scenes there enacted, and
attempted, in the name of God and humanity, to interfere in the programme.
He barely escaped with his life, was driven out of the city and became an
exile because of his actions. Reverend King was in New York about the
middle of February, and he was there interviewed for a daily paper for
that city, and we quote his account as an eye witness of the affair. Said
he:

  I was ridden out of Paris on a rail because I was the only man in Lamar
  county to raise my voice against the lynching of Smith. I opposed the
  illegal measures before the arrival of Henry Smith as a prisoner, and I
  was warned that I might meet his fate if I was not careful; but the
  sense of justice made me bold, and when I saw the poor wretch trembling
  with fear, and got so near him that I could hear his teeth chatter, I
  determined to stand by him to the last.

  I hated him for his crime, but two crimes do not make a virtue; and in
  the brief conversation I had with Smith I was more firmly convinced than
  ever that he was irresponsible.

  I had known Smith for years, and there were times when Smith was out of
  his head for weeks. Two years ago I made an effort to have him put in an
  asylum, but the white people were trying to fasten the murder of a young
  colored girl upon him, and would not listen. For days before the murder
  of the little Vance girl, Smith was out of his head and dangerous. He
  had just undergone an attack of delirium tremens and was in no condition
  to be allowed at large. He realized his condition, for I spoke with him
  not three weeks ago, and in answer to my exhortations, he promised to
  reform. The next time I saw him was on the day of his execution.

  "Drink did it! drink did it," he sobbed. Then bowing his face in his
  hands, he asked: "Is it true, did I kill her? Oh, my God, my God!" For a
  moment he seemed to forget the awful fate that awaited him, and his body
  swayed to and fro with grief. Some one seized me by the shoulder and
  hurled me back, and Smith fell writhing to the ground in terror as four
  men seized his arms to drag him to the float on which he was to be
  exhibited before he was finally burned at the stake.

  I followed the procession and wept aloud as I saw little children of my
  own race follow the unfortunate man and taunt him with jeers. Even at
  the stake, children of both sexes and colors gathered in groups, and
  when the father of the murdered child raised the hissing iron with which
  he was about to torture the helpless victim, the children became as
  frantic as the grown people and struggled forward to obtain places of
  advantage.

  It was terrible. One little tot scarcely older than little Myrtle Vance
  clapped her baby hands as her father held her on his shoulders above the
  heads of the people.

  "For God's sake," I shouted, "send the children home."

  "No, no," shouted a hundred maddened voices; "let them learn a lesson."

  I love children, but as I looked about the little faces distorted with
  passion and the bloodshot eyes of the cruel parents who held them high
  in their arms, I thanked God that I have none of my own.

  As the hot iron sank deep into poor Henry's flesh a hideous yell rent
  the air, and, with a sound as terrible as the cry, of lost souls on
  judgment day, 20,000 maddened people took up the victim's cry of agony
  and a prolonged howl of maddened glee rent the air.

  No one was himself now. Every man, woman and child in that awful crowd
  was worked up to a greater frenzy than that which actuated Smith's
  horrible crime. The people were capable of any new atrocity now, and as
  Smith's yells became more and more frequent, it was difficult to hold
  the crowd back, so anxious were the savages to participate in the
  sickening tortures.

  For half an hour I tried to pray as the beads of agony rolled down my
  forehead and bathed my face.

  For an instant a hush spread over the people. I could stand no more, and
  with a superhuman effort dashed through the compact mass of humanity and
  stood at the foot of the burning scaffold.

  "In the name of God," I cried, "I command you to cease this torture."

  The heavy butt of a Winchester rifle descended on my head and I fell to
  the ground. Rough hands seized me and angry men bore me away, and I was
  thankful.

  At the outskirts of the crowd I was attacked again, and then several
  men, no doubt glad to get away from the fearful place, escorted me to my
  home, where I was allowed to take a small amount of clothing. A jeering
  crowd gathered without, and when I appeared at the door ready hands
  seized me and I was placed upon a rail, and, with curses and oaths,
  taken to the railway station and placed upon a train. As the train moved
  out some one thrust a roll of bills into my hand and said, "God bless
  you, but it was no use."

When asked if he should ever return to Paris, Mr. King said: "I shall
never go south again. The impressions of that awful day will stay with me
forever."


LYNCHING OF INNOCENT MEN

(Lynched on Account of Relationship)

If no other reason appealed to the sober sense of the American people to
check the growth of Lynch Law, the absolute unreliability and recklessness
of the mob in inflicting punishment for crimes done, should do so. Several
instances of this spirit have occurred in the year past. In Louisiana,
near New Orleans, in July, 1893, Roselius Julian, a colored man, shot and
killed a white judge, named Victor Estopinal. The cause of the shooting
has never been definitely ascertained. It is claimed that the Negro
resented an insult to his wife, and the killing of the white man was an
act of a Negro (who dared) to defend his home. The judge was killed in the
court house, and Julian, heavily armed, made his escape to the swamps near
the city. He has never been apprehended, nor has any information ever been
gleaned as to his whereabouts. A mob determined to secure the fugitive
murderer and burn him alive. The swamps were hunted through and through in
vain, when, being unable to wreak their revenge upon the murderer, the mob
turned its attention to his unfortunate relatives. Dispatches from New
Orleans, dated September 19, 1893, described the affair as follows:

  Posses were immediately organized and the surrounding country was
  scoured, but the search was fruitless so far as the real criminal was
  concerned. The mother, three brothers and two sisters of the Negro were
  arrested yesterday at the Black Ridge in the rear of the city by the
  police and taken to the little jail on Judge Estopinal's place about
  Southport, because of the belief that they were succoring the fugitive.

  About 11 o'clock twenty-five men, some armed with rifles and shotguns,
  came up to the jail. They unlocked the door and held a conference among
  themselves as to what they should do. Some were in favor of hanging the
  five, while others insisted that only two of the brothers should be
  strung up. This was finally agreed to, and the two doomed negroes were
  hurried to a pasture one hundred yards distant, and there asked to take
  their last chance of saving their lives by making a confession, but the
  Negroes made no reply. They were then told to kneel down and pray. One
  did so, the other remained standing, but both prayed fervently. The
  taller Negro was then hoisted up. The shorter Negro stood gazing at the
  horrible death of his brother without flinching. Five minutes later he
  was also hanged. The mob decided to take the remaining brother out to
  Camp Parapet and hang him there. The other two were to be taken out and
  flogged, with an order to get out of the parish in less than half an
  hour. The third brother, Paul, was taken out to the camp, which is about
  a mile distant in the interior, and there he was hanged to a tree.

Another young man, who was in no way related to Julian, who perhaps did
not even know the man and who was entirely innocent of any offense in
connection therewith, was murdered by the same mob. The same paper says:

  During the search for Julian on Saturday one branch of the posse visited
  the house of a Negro family in the neighborhood of Camp Parapet, and
  failing to find the object of their search, tried to induce John Willis,
  a young Negro, to disclose the whereabouts of Julian. He refused to do
  so, or could not do so, and was kicked to death by the gang.


AN INDIANA CASE

Almost equal to the ferocity of the mob which killed the three brothers,
Julian and the unoffending, John Willis, because of the murder of Judge
Estopinal, was the action of a mob near Vincennes, Ind. In this case a
wealthy colored man, named Allen Butler, who was well known in the
community, and enjoyed the confidence and respect of the entire country,
was made the victim of a mob and hung because his son had become unduly
intimate with a white girl who was a servant around his house. There was
no pretense that the facts were otherwise than as here stated. The woman
lived at Butler's house as a servant, and she and Butler's son fell in
love with each other, and later it was found that the girl was in a
delicate condition. It was claimed, but with how much truth no one has
ever been able to tell, that the father had procured an abortion, or
himself had operated on the girl, and that she had left the house to go
back to her home. It was never claimed that the father was in any way
responsible for the action of his son, but the authorities procured the
arrest of both father and son, and at the preliminary examination the
father gave bail to appear before the Grand Jury when it should convene.
On the same night, however, the mob took the matter in hand and with the
intention of hanging the son. It assembled near Sumner, while the boy, who
had been unable to give bail, was lodged in jail at Lawrenceville. As it
was impossible to reach Lawrenceville and hang the son, the leaders of the
mob concluded they would go to Butler's house and hang him. Butler was
found at his home, taken out by the mob and hung to a tree. This was in
the lawabiding state of Indiana, which furnished the United States its
last president and which claims all the honor, pride and glory of northern
civilization. None of the leaders of the mob were apprehended, and no
steps whatever were taken to bring the murderers to justice.


KILLED FOR HIS STEPFATHER'S CRIME

An account has been given of the cremation of Henry Smith, at Paris,
Texas, for the murder of the infant child of a man named Vance. It would
appear that human ferocity was not sated when it vented itself upon a
human being by burning his eyes out, by thrusting a red-hot iron down his
throat, and then by burning his body to ashes. Henry Smith, the victim of
these savage orgies, was beyond all the power of torture, but a few miles
outside of Paris, some members of the community concluded that it would be
proper to kill a stepson named William Butler as a partial penalty for the
original crime. This young man, against whom no word has ever been said,
and who was in fact an orderly, peaceable boy, had been watched with the
severest scrutiny by members of the mob who believed he knew something of
the whereabouts of Smith. He declared from the very first that he did not
know where his stepfather was, which statement was well proven to be a
fact after the discovery of Smith in Arkansas, whence he had fled through
swamps and woods and unfrequented places. Yet Butler was apprehended,
placed under arrest, and on the night of February 6, taken out on Hickory
Creek, five miles southeast of Paris, and hung for his stepfather's crime.
After his body was suspended in the air, the mob filled it with bullets.


LYNCHED BECAUSE THE JURY ACQUITTED HIM

The entire system of the judiciary of this country is in the hands of
white people. To this add the fact of the inherent prejudice against
colored people, and it will be clearly seen that a white jury is certain
to find a Negro prisoner guilty if there is the least evidence to warrant
such a finding.

Meredith Lewis was arrested in Roseland, La., in July of last year. A
white jury found him not guilty of the crime of murder wherewith he stood
charged. This did not suit the mob. A few nights after the verdict was
rendered, and he declared to be innocent, a mob gathered in his vicinity
and went to his house. He was called, and suspecting nothing, went
outside. He was seized and hurried off to a convenient spot and hanged by
the neck until he was dead for the murder of a woman of which the jury had
said he was innocent.


LYNCHED AS A SCAPEGOAT

Wednesday, July 5, about 10 o'clock in the morning, a terrible crime was
committed within four miles of Wickliffe, Ky. Two girls, Mary and Ruby
Ray, were found murdered a short distance from their home. The news of
this terrible cowardly murder of two helpless young girls spread like wild
fire, and searching parties scoured the territory surrounding Wickliffe
and Bardwell. Two of the searching party, the Clark brothers, saw a man
enter the Dupoyster cornfield; they got their guns and fired at the
fleeing figure, but without effect; he got away, but they said he was a
white man or nearly so. The search continued all day without effect, save
the arrest of two or three strange Negroes. A bloodhound was brought from
the penitentiary and put on the trail which he followed from the scene of
the murder to the river and into the boat of a fisherman named Gordon.
Gordon stated that he had ferried one man and only one across the river
about about half past six the evening of July 5; that his passenger sat in
front of him, and he was a white man or a very bright mulatto, who could
not be told from a white man. The bloodhound was put across the river in
the boat, and he struck a trail again at Bird's Point on the Missouri
side, ran about three hundred yards to the cottage of a white farmer named
Grant and there lay down refusing to go further.

Thursday morning a brakesman on a freight train going out of Sikeston,
Mo., discovered a Negro stealing a ride; he ordered him off and had hot
words which terminated in a fight. The brakesman had the Negro arrested.
When arrested, between 11 and 12 o'clock, he had on a dark woolen shirt,
light pants and coat, and no vest. He had twelve dollars in paper, two
silver dollars and ninety-five cents in change; he had also four rings in
his pockets, a knife and a razor which were rusted and stained. The
Sikeston authorities immediately jumped to the conclusion that this man
was the murderer for whom the Kentuckians across the river were searching.
They telegraphed to Bardwell that their prisoner had on no coat, but wore
a blue vest and pants which would perhaps correspond with the coat found
at the scene of the murder, and that the names of the murdered girls were
in the rings found in his possession.

As soon as this news was received, the sheriffs of Ballard and Carlisle
counties and a posse(?) of thirty well-armed and determined Kentuckians,
who had pledged their word the prisoner should be taken back to the scene
of the supposed crime, to be executed there if proved to be the guilty
man, chartered a train and at nine o'clock Thursday night started for
Sikeston. Arriving there two hours later, the sheriff at Sikeston, who had
no warrant for the prisoner's arrest and detention, delivered him into the
hands of the mob without authority for so doing, and accompanied them to
Bird's Point. The prisoner gave his name as Miller, his home at
Springfield, and said he had never been in Kentucky in his life, but the
sheriff turned him over to the mob to be taken to Wickliffe, that Frank
Gordon, the fisherman, who had put a man across the river might identify
him.

In other words, the protection of the law was withdrawn from C.J. Miller,
and he was given to a mob by this sheriff at Sikeston, who knew that the
prisoner's life depended on one man's word. After an altercation with the
train men, who wanted another $50 for taking the train back to Bird's
Point, the crowd arrived there at three o'clock, Friday morning. Here was
anchored _The Three States_, a ferryboat plying between Wickliffe, Ky,
Cairo, Ill., and Bird's Point, Mo. This boat left Cairo at twelve o'clock,
Thursday, with nearly three hundred of Cairo's best(?) citizens and thirty
kegs of beer on board. This was consumed while the crowd and the
bloodhound waited for the prisoner.

When the prisoner was on board _The Three States_ the dog was turned
loose, and after moving aimlessly around, followed the crowd to where
Miller sat handcuffed and there stopped. The crowd closed in on the pair
and insisted that the brute had identified him because of that action.
When the boat reached Wickliffe, Gordon, the fisherman, was called on to
say whether the prisoner was the man he ferried over the river the day of
the murder.

[Illustration: Lynching of C.J. Miller, at Bardwell, Kentucky, July 7,
1893.]

The sheriff of Ballard County informed him, sternly that if the prisoner
was not the man, he (the fisherman) would be held responsible as knowing
who the guilty man was. Gordon stated before, that the man he ferried
across was a white man or a bright colored man; Miller was a dark brown
skinned man, with kinky hair, "neither yellow nor black," says the _Cairo
Evening Telegram_ of Friday, July 7. The fisherman went up to Miller from
behind, looked at him without speaking for fully five minutes, then slowly
said, "Yes, that's the man I crossed over." This was about six o'clock,
Friday morning, and the crowd wished to hang Miller then and there. But
Mr. Ray, the father of the girls, insisted that he be taken to Bardwell,
the county seat of Ballard, and twelve miles inland. He said he thought a
white man committed the crime, and that he was not satisfied that was the
man. They took him to Bardwell and at ten o'clock, this same excited,
unauthorized mob undertook to determine Miller's guilt. One of the Clark
brothers who shot at a fleeing man in the Dupoyster cornfield, said the
prisoner was the same man; the other said he was not, but the testimony of
the first was accepted. A colored woman who had said she gave breakfast to
a colored man clad in a blue flannel suit the morning of the murder, said
positively that she had never seen Miller before. The gold rings found in
his possession had no names in them, as had been asserted, and Mr. Ray
said they did not belong to his daughters. Meantime a funeral pyre for the
purpose of burning Miller to death had been erected in the center of the
village. While the crowd swayed by passion was clamoring that he be burnt,
Miller stepped forward and made the following statement: "My name is
C.J. Miller. I am from Springfield, Ill.; my wife lives at 716 N. 2d
Street. I am here among you today, looked upon as one of the most brutal
men before the people. I stand here surrounded by men who are excited, men
who are not willing to let the law take its course, and as far as the
crime is concerned, I have committed no crime, and certainly no crime
gross enough to deprive me of my life and liberty to walk upon the green
earth."

A telegram was sent to the chief of the police at Springfield, Ill.,
asking if one C.J. Miller lived there. An answer in the negative was
returned. A few hours after, it was ascertained that a man named Miller,
and his wife, did live at the number the prisoner gave in his speech, but
the information came to Bardwell too late to do the prisoner any good.
Miller was taken to jail, every stitch of clothing literally torn from his
body and examined again. On the lower left side of the bosom of his shirt
was found a dark reddish spot about the size of a dime. Miller said it was
paint which he had gotten on him at Jefferson Barracks. This spot was only
on the right side, and could not be seen from the under side at all, thus
showing it had not gone through the cloth as blood or any liquid substance
would do.

Chief-of-Police Mahaney, of Cairo, Ill., was with the prisoner, and he
took his knife and scraped at the spot, particles of which came off in his
hand. Miller told them to take his clothes to any expert, and if the spot
was shown to be blood, they might do anything they wished with him. They
took his clothes away and were gone some time. After a while they were
brought back and thrown into the cell without a word. It is needless to
say that if the spot had been found to be blood, that fact would have been
announced, and the shirt retained as evidence. Meanwhile numbers of rough,
drunken men crowded into the cell and tried to force a confession of the
deed from the prisoner's lips. He refused to talk save to reiterate his
innocence. To Mr. Mahaney, who talked seriously and kindly to him, telling
him the mob meant to burn and torture him at three o'clock, Miller said:
"Burning and torture here lasts but a little while, but if I die with a
lie on my soul, I shall be tortured forever. I am innocent." For more than
three hours, all sorts of pressure in the way of threats, abuse and
urging, was brought to bear to force him to confess to the murder and thus
justify the mob in its deed of murder. Miller remained firm; but as the
hour drew near, and the crowd became more impatient, he asked for a
priest. As none could be procured, he then asked for a Methodist minister,
who came, prayed with the doomed man, baptized him and exhorted Miller to
confess. To keep up the flagging spirits of the dense crowd around the
jail, the rumor went out more than once, that Miller had confessed. But
the solemn assurance of the minister, chief-of-police, and leading
editor--who were with Miller all along--is that this rumor is absolutely
false.

At three o'clock the mob rushed to the jail to secure the prisoner. Mr.
Ray had changed his mind about the promised burning; he was still in doubt
as to the prisoner's guilt. He again addressed the crowd to that effect,
urging them not to burn Miller, and the mob heeded him so far, that they
compromised on hanging instead of burning, which was agreed to by Mr. Ray.
There was a loud yell, and a rush was made for the prisoner. He was
stripped naked, his clothing literally torn from his body, and his shirt
was tied around his loins. Some one declared the rope was a "white man's
death," and a log-chain, nearly a hundred feet in length, weighing over
one hundred pounds, was placed round Miller's neck and body, and he was
led and dragged through the streets of the village in that condition
followed by thousands of people. He fainted from exhaustion several times,
but was supported to the platform where they first intended burning him.

The chain was hooked around his neck, a man climbed the telegraph pole and
the other end of the chain was passed up to him and made fast to the
cross-arm. Others brought a long forked stick which Miller was made to
straddle. By this means he was raised several feet from the ground and
then let fall. The first fall broke his neck, but he was raised in this
way and let fall a second time. Numberless shots were fired into the
dangling body, for most of that crowd were heavily armed, and had been
drinking all day.

Miller's body hung thus exposed from three to five o'clock, during which
time, several photographs of him as he hung dangling at the end of the
chain were taken, and his toes and fingers were cut off. His body was
taken down, placed on the platform, the torch applied, and in a few
moments there was nothing left of C.J. Miller save a few bones and ashes.
Thus perished another of the many victims of Lynch Law, but it is the
honest and sober belief of many who witnessed the scene that an innocent
man has been barbarously and shockingly put to death in the glare of the
nineteenth-century civilization, by those who profess to believe in
Christianity, law and order.




5

LYNCHED FOR ANYTHING OR NOTHING

(_Lynched for Wife Beating_)


In nearly all communities wife beating is punishable with a fine, and in
no community is it made a felony. Dave Jackson, of Abita, La., was a
colored man who had beaten his wife. He had not killed her, nor seriously
wounded her, but as Louisiana lynchers had not filled out their quota of
crimes, his case was deemed of sufficient importance to apply the method
of that barbarous people. He was in the custody of the officials, but the
mob went to the jail and took him out in front of the prison and hanged
him by the neck until he was dead. This was in Nov. 1893.


HANGED FOR STEALING HOGS

Details are very meagre of a lynching which occurred near Knox Point, La.,
on the twenty-fourth of October, 1893. Upon one point, however, there was
no uncertainty, and that is, that the persons lynched were Negroes. It was
claimed that they had been stealing hogs, but even this claim had not been
subjected to the investigation of a court. That matter was not considered
necessary. A few of the neighbors who had lost hogs suspected these men
were responsible for their loss, and made up their minds to furnish an
example for others to be warned by. The two men were secured by a mob and
hanged.


LYNCHED FOR NO OFFENSE

Perhaps the most characteristic feature of this record of lynch law for
the year 1893, is the remarkable fact that five human beings were lynched
and that the matter was considered of so little importance that the
powerful press bureaus of the country did not consider the matter of
enough importance to ascertain the causes for which they were hanged. It
tells the world, with perhaps greater emphasis than any other feature of
the record, that Lynch Law has become so common in the United States that
the finding of the dead body of a Negro, suspended between heaven and
earth to the limb of a tree, is of so slight importance that neither the
civil authorities nor press agencies consider the matter worth
investigating. July 21, in Shelby County, Tenn., a colored man by the name
of Charles Martin was lynched. July 30, at Paris, Mo., a colored man named
William Steen shared the same fate. December 28, Mack Segars was announced
to have been lynched at Brantley, Alabama. August 31, at Yarborough,
Texas, and on September 19, at Houston, a colored man was found lynched,
but so little attention was paid to the matter that not only was no record
made as to why these last two men were lynched, but even their names were
not given. The dispatches simply stated that an unknown Negro was found
lynched in each case.

There are friends of humanity who feel their souls shrink from any
compromise with murder, but whose deep and abiding reverence for womanhood
causes them to hesitate in giving their support to this crusade against
Lynch Law, out of fear that they may encourage the miscreants whose deeds
are worse than murder. But to these friends it must appear certain that
these five men could not have been guilty of any terrible crime. They were
simply lynched by parties of men who had it in their power to kill them,
and who chose to avenge some fancied wrong by murder, rather than submit
their grievances to court.


LYNCHED BECAUSE THEY WERE SAUCY

At Moberly, Mo., February 18 and at Fort Madison, S.C., June 2, both in
1892, a record was made in the line of lynching which should certainly
appeal to every humanitarian who has any regard for the sacredness of
human life. John Hughes, of Moberly, and Isaac Lincoln, of Fort Madison,
and Will Lewis in Tullahoma, Tenn., suffered death for no more serious
charge than that they "were saucy to white people." In the days of slavery
it was held to be a very serious matter for a colored person to fail to
yield the sidewalk at the demand of a white person, and it will not be
surprising to find some evidence of this intolerance existing in the days
of freedom. But the most that could be expected as a penalty for acting or
speaking saucily to a white person would be a slight physical chastisement
to make the Negro "know his place" or an arrest and fine. But Missouri,
Tennessee and South Carolina chose to make precedents in their cases and
as a result both men, after being charged with their offense and
apprehended, were taken by a mob and lynched. The civil authorities, who
in either case would have been very quick to satisfy the aggrieved white
people had they complained and brought the prisoners to court, by imposing
proper penalty upon them, did not feel it their duty to make any
investigation after the Negroes were killed. They were dead and out of the
way and as no one would be called upon to render an account for their
taking off, the matter was dismissed from the public mind.


LYNCHED FOR A QUARREL

One of the most notable instances of lynching for the year 1893, occurred
about the twentieth of September. It was notable for the fact that the
mayor of the city exerted every available power to protect the victim of
the lynching from the mob. In his splendid endeavor to uphold the law, the
mayor called out the troops, and the result was a deadly fight between the
militia and mob, nine of the mob being killed. The trouble occurred at
Roanoke, Va. It is frequently claimed that lynchings occur only in
sparsely settled districts, and, in fact, it is a favorite plea of
governors and reverend apologists to couple two arrant falsehoods, stating
that lynchings occur only because of assaults upon white women, and that
these assaults occur and the lynchings follow in thinly inhabited
districts where the power of the law is entirely inadequate to meet the
emergency. This Roanoke case is a double refutation, for it not only
disproves the alleged charge that the Negro assaulted a white woman, as
was telegraphed all over the country at the time, but it also shows
conclusively that even in one of the largest cities of the old state of
Virginia, one of the original thirteen colonies, which prides itself of
being the mother of presidents, it was possible for a lynching to occur in
broad daylight under circumstances of revolting savagery.

When the news first came from Roanoke of the contemplated lynching, it was
stated that a big burly Negro had assaulted a white woman, that he had
been apprehended and that the citizens were determined to summarily
dispose of his case. Mayor Trout was a man who believed in maintaining the
majesty of the law, and who at once gave notice that no lynching would be
permitted in Roanoke, and that the Negro, whose name was Smith, being in
the custody of the law, should be dealt with according to law; but the mob
did not pay any attention to the brave words of the mayor. It evidently
thought that it was only another case of swagger, such as frequently
characterizes lynching episodes. Mayor Trout, finding immense crowds
gathering about the city, and fearing an attempt to lynch Smith, called
out the militia and stationed them at the jail.

It was known that the woman refused to accuse Smith of assaulting her, and
that his offense consisted in quarreling with her about the change of
money in a transaction in which he bought something from her market booth.
Both parties lost their temper, and the result was a row from which Smith
had to make his escape. At once the old cry was sounded that the woman had
been assaulted, and in a few hours all the town was wild with people
thirsting for the assailant's blood. The further incidents of that day may
well be told by a dispatch from Roanoke under date of the twenty-first of
September and published in the _Chicago Record_. It says:

  It is claimed by members of the military company that they frequently
  warned the mob to keep away from the jail, under penalty of being shot.
  Capt. Bird told them he was under orders to protect the prisoner whose
  life the mob so eagerly sought, and come what may he would not allow him
  to be taken by the mob. To this the crowd replied with hoots and
  derisive jeers. The rioters appeared to become frenzied at the
  determined stand taken by the men and Captain Bird, and finally a crowd
  of excited men made a rush for the side door of the jail. The captain
  directed his men to drive the would-be lynchers back.

  At this moment the mob opened fire on the soldiers. This appeared for a
  moment to startle the captain and his men. But it was only for a moment.
  Then he coolly gave the command: "Ready! aim! fire!" The company obeyed
  to the instant, and poured a volley of bullets into that part of the
  mob which was trying to batter down the side door of the jail.

  The rioters fell back before the fire of the militia, leaving one man
  writhing in the agonies of death at the doorstep. There was a lull for a
  moment. Then the word was quickly passed through the throng in front of
  the jail and down the street that a man was killed. Then there was an
  awful rush toward the little band of soldiers. Excited men were yelling
  like demons.

  The fight became general, and ere it was ended nine men were dead and
  more than forty wounded.

This stubborn stand on behalf of law and order disconcerted the crowd and
it fell back in disorder. It did not long remain inactive but assembled
again for a second assault. Having only a small band of militia, and
knowing they would be absolutely at the mercy of the thousands who were
gathering to wreak vengeance upon them, the mayor ordered them to disperse
and go to their homes, and he himself, having been wounded, was quietly
conveyed out of the city.

The next day the mob grew in numbers and its rage increased in its
intensity. There was no longer any doubt that Smith, innocent as he was of
any crime, would be killed, for with the mayor out of the city and the
governor of the state using no effort to control the mob, it was only a
question of a few hours when the assault would be repeated and its victim
put to death. All this happened as per programme. The description of that
morning's carnival appeared in the paper above quoted and reads as
follows:

  A squad of twenty men took the negro Smith from three policemen just
  before five o'clock this morning and hanged him to a hickory limb on
  Ninth Avenue, in the residence section of the city. They riddled his
  body with bullets and put a placard on it saying: "This is Mayor Trout's
  friend." A coroner's jury of Bismel was summoned and viewed the body and
  rendered a verdict of death at the hands of unknown men. Thousands of
  persons visited the scene of the lynching between daylight and eight
  o'clock when the body was cut down. After the jury had completed its
  work the body was placed in the hands of officers, who were unable to
  keep back the mob. Three hundred men tried to drag the body through the
  streets of the town, but the Rev. Dr. Campbell of the First Presbyterian
  church and Capt. R.B. Moorman, with pleas and by force prevented them.

  Capt. Moorman hired a wagon and the body was put in it. It was then
  conveyed to the bank of the Roanoke, about two miles from the scene of
  the lynching. Here the body was dragged from the wagon by ropes for
  about 200 yards and burned. Piles of dry brushwood were brought, and the
  body was placed upon it, and more brushwood piled on the body, leaving
  only the head bare. The whole pile was then saturated with coal oil and
  a match was applied. The body was consumed within an hour. The cremation
  was witnessed by several thousand people. At one time the mob threatened
  to burn the Negro in Mayor Trout's yard.

Thus did the people of Roanoke, Va., add this measure of proof to maintain
our contention that it is only necessary to charge a Negro with a crime in
order to secure his certain death. It was well known in the city before he
was killed that he had not assaulted the woman with whom he had had the
trouble, but he dared to have an altercation with a white woman, and he
must pay the penalty. For an offense which would not in any civilized
community have brought upon him a punishment greater than a fine of a few
dollars, this unfortunate Negro was hung, shot and burned.


SUSPECTED, INNOCENT AND LYNCHED

Five persons, Benjamin Jackson, his wife, Mahala Jackson, his
mother-in-law, Lou Carter, Rufus Bigley, were lynched near Quincy, Miss.,
the charge against them being suspicion of well poisoning. It appears from
the newspaper dispatches at that time that a family by the name of
Woodruff was taken ill in September of 1892. As a result of their illness
one or more of the family are said to have died, though that matter is not
stated definitely. It was suspected that the cause of their illness was
the existence of poison in the water, some miscreant having placed poison
in the well. Suspicion pointed to a colored man named Benjamin Jackson who
was at once arrested. With him also were arrested his wife and
mother-in-law and all were held on the same charge.

The matter came up for judicial investigation, but as might have been
expected, the white people concluded it was unnecessary to wait the result
of the investigation--that it was preferable to hang the accused first and
try him afterward. By this method of procedure, the desired result was
always obtained--the accused was hanged. Accordingly Benjamin Jackson was
taken from the officers by a crowd of about two hundred people, while the
inquest was being held, and hanged. After the killing of Jackson, the
inquest was continued to ascertain the possible connection of the other
persons charged with the crime. Against the wife and mother-in-law of the
unfortunate man there was not the slightest evidence and the coroner's
jury was fair enough to give them their liberty. They were declared
innocent and returned to their homes. But this did not protect the women
from the demands of the Christian white people of that section of the
country. In any other land and with any other people, the fact that these
two accused persons were women would have pleaded in their favor for
protection and fair play, but that had no weight with the Mississippi
Christians nor the further fact that a jury of white men had declared them
innocent. The hanging of one victim on an unproven charge did not begin to
satisfy the mob in its bloodthirsty demands and the result was that even
after the women had been discharged, they were at once taken in charge by
a mob, which hung them by the neck until they were dead.

Still the mob was not satisfied. During the coroner's investigation the
name of a fourth person, Rufus Bigley, was mentioned. He was acquainted
with the Jacksons and that fact, together with some testimony adduced at
the inquest, prompted the mob to decide that he should die also. Search
was at once made for him and the next day he was apprehended. He was not
given over into the hands of the civil authorities for trial nor did the
coroner's inquest find that he was guilty, but the mob was quite
sufficient in itself. After finding Bigley, he was strung up to a tree and
his body left hanging, where it was found next day. It may be remarked
here in passing that this instance of the moral degradation of the people
of Mississippi did not excite any interest in the public at large.
American Christianity heard of this awful affair and read of its details
and neither press nor pulpit gave the matter more than a passing comment.
Had it occurred in the wilds of interior Africa, there would have been an
outcry from the humane people of this country against the savagery which
would so mercilessly put men and women to death. But it was an evidence of
American civilization to be passed by unnoticed, to be denied or condoned
as the requirements of any future emergency might determine.


LYNCHED FOR AN ATTEMPTED ASSAULT

With only a little more aggravation than that of Smith who quarreled at
Roanoke with the market woman, was the assault which operated as the
incentive to a most brutal lynching in Memphis, Tenn. Memphis is one of
the queen cities of the south, with a population of about seventy thousand
souls--easily one of the twenty largest, most progressive and wealthiest
cities of the United States. And yet in its streets there occurred a scene
of shocking savagery which would have disgraced the Congo. No woman was
harmed, no serious indignity suffered. Two women driving to town in a
wagon, were suddenly accosted by Lee Walker. He claimed that he demanded
something to eat. The women claimed that he attempted to assault them.
They gave such an alarm that he ran away. At once the dispatches spread
over the entire country that a big, burly Negro had brutally assaulted two
women. Crowds began to search for the alleged fiend. While hunting him
they shot another Negro dead in his tracks for refusing to stop when
ordered to do so. After a few days Lee Walker was found, and put in jail
in Memphis until the mob there was ready for him.

The _Memphis Commercial_ of Sunday, July 23, contains a full account of
the tragedy from which the following extracts are made:

  At 12 o'clock last night, Lee Walker, who attempted to outrage Miss
  Mollie McCadden, last Tuesday morning, was taken from the county jail
  and hanged to a telegraph pole just north of the prison. All day rumors
  were afloat that with nightfall an attack would be made upon the jail,
  and as everyone anticipated that a vigorous resistance would be made, a
  conflict between the mob and the authorities was feared.

  At 10 o'clock Capt. O'Haver, Sergt. Horan and several patrolmen were on
  hand, but they could do nothing with the crowd. An attack by the mob was
  made on the door in the south wall, and it yielded. Sheriff McLendon and
  several of his men threw themselves into the breach, but two or three of
  the storming party shoved by. They were seized by the police, but were
  not subdued, the officers refraining from using their clubs. The entire
  mob might at first have been dispersed by ten policemen who would use
  their clubs, but the sheriff insisted that no violence be done.

  The mob got an iron rail and used it as a battering ram against the
  lobby doors. Sheriff McLendon tried to stop them, and some one of the
  mob knocked him down with a chair. Still he counseled moderation and
  would not order his deputies and the police to disperse the crowd by
  force. The pacific policy of the sheriff impressed the mob with the idea
  that the officers were afraid, or at least would do them no harm, and
  they redoubled their efforts, urged on by a big switchman. At 12 o'clock
  the door of the prison was broken in with a rail.

  As soon as the rapist was brought out of the door calls were heard for a
  rope; then someone shouted, "Burn him!" But there was no time to make a
  fire. When Walker got into the lobby a dozen of the men began beating
  and stabbing him. He was half dragged, half carried to the corner of
  Front Street and the alley between Sycamore and Mill, and hung to a
  telegraph pole.

  Walker made a desperate resistance. Two men entered his cell first and
  ordered him to come forth. He refused, and they failing to drag him out,
  others entered. He scratched and bit his assailants, wounding several of
  them severely with his teeth. The mob retaliated by striking and cutting
  him with fists and knives. When he reached the steps leading down to the
  door he made another stand and was stabbed again and again. By the time
  he reached the lobby his power to resist was gone, and he was shoved
  along through the mob of yelling, cursing men and boys, who beat, spat
  upon and slashed the wretch-like demon. One of the leaders of the mob
  fell, and the crowd walked ruthlessly over him. He was badly hurt--a
  jawbone fractured and internal injuries inflicted. After the lynching
  friends took charge of him.

  The mob proceeded north on Front Street with the victim, stopping at
  Sycamore Street to get a rope from a grocery. "Take him to the iron
  bridge on Main Street," yelled several men. The men who had hold of the
  Negro were in a hurry to finish the job, however, and when they reached
  the telephone pole at the corner of Front Street and the first alley
  north of Sycamore they stopped. A hastily improvised noose was slipped
  over the Negro's head, and several young men mounted a pile of lumber
  near the pole and threw the rope over one of the iron stepping pins. The
  Negro was lifted up until his feet were three feet above the ground, the
  rope was made taut, and a corpse dangled in midair. A big fellow who
  helped lead the mob pulled the Negro's legs until his neck cracked. The
  wretch's clothes had been torn off, and, as he swung, the man who pulled
  his legs mutilated the corpse.

  One or two knife cuts, more or less, made little difference in the
  appearance of the dead rapist, however, for before the rope was around
  his neck his skin was cut almost to ribbons. One pistol shot was fired
  while the corpse was hanging. A dozen voices protested against the use
  of firearms, and there was no more shooting. The body was permitted to
  hang for half an hour, then it was cut down and the rope divided among
  those who lingered around the scene of the tragedy. Then it was
  suggested that the corpse be burned, and it was done. The entire
  performance, from the assault on the jail to the burning of the dead
  Negro was witnessed by a score or so of policemen and as many deputy
  sheriffs, but not a hand was lifted to stop the proceedings after the
  jail door yielded.

  As the body hung to the telegraph pole, blood streaming down from the
  knife wounds in his neck, his hips and lower part of his legs also
  slashed with knives, the crowd hurled expletives at him, swung the body
  so that it was dashed against the pole, and, so far from the ghastly
  sight proving trying to the nerves, the crowd looked on with
  complaisance, if not with real pleasure. The Negro died hard. The neck
  was not broken, as the body was drawn up without being given a fall, and
  death came by strangulation. For fully ten minutes after he was strung
  up the chest heaved occasionally, and there were convulsive movements of
  the limbs. Finally he was pronounced dead, and a few minutes later
  Detective Richardson climbed on a pile of staves and cut the rope. The
  body fell in a ghastly heap, and the crowd laughed at the sound and
  crowded around the prostrate body, a few kicking the inanimate carcass.

  Detective Richardson, who is also a deputy coroner, then proceeded to
  impanel the following jury of inquest: J.S. Moody, A.C. Waldran, B.J.
  Childs, J.N. House, Nelson Bills, T.L. Smith, and A. Newhouse. After
  viewing the body the inquest was adjourned without any testimony being
  taken until 9 o'clock this morning. The jury will meet at the coroner's
  office, 51 Beale Street, upstairs, and decide on a verdict. If no
  witnesses are forthcoming, the jury will be able to arrive at a verdict
  just the same, as all members of it saw the lynching. Then someone
  raised the cry of "Burn him!" It was quickly taken up and soon resounded
  from a hundred throats. Detective Richardson, for a long time,
  single-handed, stood the crowd off. He talked and begged the men not to
  bring disgrace on the city by burning the body, arguing that all the
  vengeance possible had been wrought.

  While this was going on a small crowd was busy starting a fire in the
  middle of the street. The material was handy. Some bundles of staves
  were taken from the adjoining lumber yard for kindling. Heavier wood was
  obtained from the same source, and coal oil from a neighboring grocery.
  Then the cries of "Burn him! Burn him!" were redoubled.

  Half a dozen men seized the naked body. The crowd cheered. They marched
  to the fire, and giving the body a swing, it was landed in the middle of
  the fire. There was a cry for more wood, as the fire had begun to die
  owing to the long delay. Willing hands procured the wood, and it was
  piled up on the Negro, almost, for a time, obscuring him from view. The
  head was in plain view, as also were the limbs, and one arm which stood
  out high above the body, the elbow crooked, held in that position by a
  stick of wood. In a few moments the hands began to swell, then came
  great blisters over all the exposed parts of the body; then in places
  the flesh was burned away and the bones began to show through. It was a
  horrible sight, one which, perhaps, none there had ever witnessed
  before. It proved too much for a large part of the crowd and the
  majority of the mob left very shortly after the burning began.

  But a large number stayed, and were not a bit set back by the sight of a
  human body being burned to ashes. Two or three white women, accompanied
  by their escorts, pushed to the front to obtain an unobstructed view,
  and looked on with astonishing coolness and nonchalance. One man and
  woman brought a little girl, not over twelve years old, apparently their
  daughter, to view a scene which was calculated to drive sleep from the
  child's eyes for many nights, if not to produce a permanent injury to
  her nervous system. The comments of the crowd were varied. Some remarked
  on the efficacy of this style of cure for rapists, others rejoiced that
  men's wives and daughters were now safe from this wretch. Some laughed
  as the flesh cracked and blistered, and while a large number pronounced
  the burning of a dead body as a useless episode, not in all that throng
  was a word of sympathy heard for the wretch himself.

  The rope that was used to hang the Negro, and also that which was used
  to lead him from the jail, were eagerly sought by relic hunters. They
  almost fought for a chance to cut off a piece of rope, and in an
  incredibly short time both ropes had disappeared and were scattered in
  the pockets of the crowd in sections of from an inch to six inches long.
  Others of the relic hunters remained until the ashes cooled to obtain
  such ghastly relics as the teeth, nails, and bits of charred skin of the
  immolated victim of his own lust. After burning the body the mob tied a
  rope around the charred trunk and dragged it down Main Street to the
  courthouse, where it was hanged to a center pole. The rope broke and the
  corpse dropped with a thud, but it was again hoisted, the charred legs
  barely touching the ground. The teeth were knocked out and the
  fingernails cut off as souvenirs. The crowd made so much noise that the
  police interfered. Undertaker Walsh was telephoned for, who took
  charge of the body and carried it to his establishment, where it will be
  prepared for burial in the potter's field today.

[Illustration: Scene of lynching at Clanton, Alabama, August 1891.]

[Illustration: Facsimile of back of photograph. W.R. MARTIN, Traveling
Photographer. (Handwritten: This S.O.B. was hung at Clanton Ala. Friday
Aug 21st/91 for murdering a little boy in cold blood for 35 in cash. He
is a good specimen of your "Black Christian hung by White Heathens"
[illegible] of the Committee.)]

A prelude to this exhibition of nineteenth-century barbarism was the
following telegram received by the _Chicago Inter Ocean_, at 2 o'clock,
Saturday afternoon--ten hours before the lynching:

  MEMPHIS TENN., July 22, To _Inter-Ocean_, Chicago.

  Lee Walker, colored man, accused of raping white women, in jail here,
  will be taken out and burned by whites tonight. Can you send Miss Ida
  Wells to write it up? Answer. R.M. Martin, with _Public Ledger_.

The _Public Ledger_ is one of the oldest evening daily papers in Memphis,
and this telegram shows that the intentions of the mob were well known
long before they were executed. The personnel of the mob is given by the
_Memphis Appeal-Avalanche_. It says, "At first it seemed as if a crowd of
roughs were the principals, but as it increased in size, men in all walks
of life figured as leaders, although the majority were young men."

This was the punishment meted out to a Negro, charged, not with rape, but
attempted assault, and without any proof as to his guilt, for the women
were not given a chance to identify him. It was only a little less
horrible than the burning alive of Henry Smith, at Paris, Texas, February
1, 1893, or that of Edward Coy, in Texarkana, Texas, February 20, 1892.
Both were charged with assault on white women, and both were tied to the
stake and burned while yet alive, in the presence of ten thousand persons.
In the case of Coy, the white woman in the case applied the match, even
while the victim protested his innocence.

The cut which is here given is the exact reproduction of the photograph
taken at the scene of the lynching at Clanton, Alabama, August, 1891. The
cause for which the man was hanged is given in the words of the mob which
were written on the back of the photograph, and they are also given. This
photograph was sent to Judge A.W. Tourgee, of Mayville, N.Y.

In some of these cases the mob affects to believe in the Negro's guilt.
The world is told that the white woman in the case identifies him, or the
prisoner "confesses." But in the lynching which took place in Barnwell
County, South Carolina, April 24, 1893, the mob's victim, John Peterson,
escaped and placed himself under Governor Tillman's protection; not only
did he declare his innocence, but offered to prove an alibi, by white
witnesses. Before his witnesses could be brought, the mob arrived at the
Governor's mansion and demanded the prisoner. He was given up, and
although the white woman in the case said he was not the man, he was
hanged twenty-four hours after, and over a thousand bullets fired into his
body, on the declaration that "a crime had been committed and someone had
to hang for it."




6

HISTORY OF SOME CASES OF RAPE


It has been claimed that the Southern white women have been slandered
because, in defending the Negro race from the charge that all colored men,
who are lynched, only pay penalty for assaulting women. It is certain that
lynching mobs have not only refused to give the Negro a chance to defend
himself, but have killed their victim with a full knowledge that the
relationship of the alleged assailant with the woman who accused him, was
voluntary and clandestine. As a matter of fact, one of the prime causes of
the Lynch Law agitation has been a necessity for defending the Negro from
this awful charge against him. This defense has been necessary because the
apologists for outlawry insist that in no case has the accusing woman been
a willing consort of her paramour, who is lynched because overtaken in
wrong. It is well known, however, that such is the case. In July of this
year, 1894, John Paul Bocock, a Southern white man living in New York, and
assistant editor of the _New York Tribune_, took occasion to defy the
publication of any instance where the lynched Negro was the victim of a
white woman's falsehood. Such cases are not rare, but the press and people
conversant with the facts, almost invariably suppress them.

The _New York Sun_ of July 30,1894, contained a synopsis of interviews
with leading congressmen and editors of the South. Speaker Crisp, of the
House of Representatives, who was recently a Judge of the Supreme Court of
Georgia, led in declaring that lynching seldom or never took place, save
for vile crime against women and children. Dr. Hass, editor of the leading
organ of the Methodist Church South, published in its columns that it was
his belief that more than three hundred women had been assaulted by Negro
men within three months. When asked to prove his charges, or give a single
case upon which his "belief" was founded, he said that he could do so, but
the details were unfit for publication. No other evidence but his "belief"
could be adduced to substantiate this grave charge, yet Bishop Haygood, in
the _Forum_ of October, 1893, quotes this "belief" in apology for
lynching, and voluntarily adds: "It is my opinion that this is an
underestimate." The "opinion" of this man, based upon a "belief," had
greater weight coming from a man who has posed as a friend to "Our Brother
in Black," and was accepted as authority. An interview of Miss Frances E.
Willard, the great apostle of temperance, the daughter of abolitionists
and a personal friend and helper of many individual colored people, has
been quoted in support of the utterance of this calumny against a weak and
defenseless race. In the _New York Voice_ of October 23, 1890, after a
tour in the South, where she was told all these things by the "best white
people," she said: "The grogshop is the Negro's center of power. Better
whisky and more of it is the rallying cry of great, dark-faced mobs. The
colored race multiplies like the locusts of Egypt. The grogshop is its
center of power. The safety of woman, of childhood, the home, is menaced
in a thousand localities at this moment, so that men dare not go beyond
the sight of their own roof-tree."

These charges so often reiterated, have had the effect of fastening the
odium upon the race of a peculiar propensity for this foul crime. The
Negro is thus forced to a defense of his good name, and this chapter will
be devoted to the history of some of the cases where assault upon white
women by Negroes is charged. He is not the aggressor in this fight, but
the situation demands that the facts be given, and they will speak for
themselves. Of the 1,115 Negro men, women and children hanged, shot and
roasted alive from January 1, 1882, to January 1, 1894, inclusive, only
348 of that number were charged with rape. Nearly 700 of these persons
were lynched for any other reason which could be manufactured by a mob
wishing to indulge in a lynching bee.


A WHITE WOMAN'S FALSEHOOD

The _Cleveland, Ohio, Gazette_, January 16, 1892, gives an account of one
of these cases of "rape."

Mrs. J.C. Underwood, the wife of a minister of Elyria, Ohio, accused an
Afro-American of rape. She told her husband that during his absence in
1888, stumping the state for the Prohibition Party, the man came to the
kitchen door, forced his way in the house and insulted her. She tried to
drive him out with a heavy poker, but he overpowered and chloroformed her,
and when she revived her clothing was torn and she was in a horrible
condition. She did not know the man, but could identify him. She
subsequently pointed out William Offett, a married man, who was arrested,
and, being in Ohio, was granted a trial.

The prisoner vehemently denied the charge of rape, but confessed he went
to Mrs. Underwood's residence at her invitation and was criminally
intimate with her at her request. This availed him nothing against the
sworn testimony of a minister's wife, a lady of the highest
respectability. He was found guilty, and entered the penitentiary,
December 14, 1888, for fifteen years. Sometime afterwards the woman's
remorse led her to confess to her husband that the man was innocent. These
are her words: "I met Offett at the postoffice. It was raining. He was
polite to me, and as I had several bundles in my arms he offered to carry
them home for me, which he did. He had a strange fascination for me, and I
invited him to call on me. He called, bringing chestnuts and candy for the
children. By this means we got them to leave us alone in the room. Then I
sat on his lap. He made a proposal to me and I readily consented. Why I
did so I do not know, but that I did is true. He visited me several times
after that and each time I was indiscreet. I did not care after the first
time. In fact I could not have resisted, and had no desire to resist."

When asked by her husband why she told him she had been outraged, she
said: "I had several reasons for telling you. One was the neighbors saw
the fellow here, another was, I was afraid I had contracted a loathsome
disease, and still another was that I feared I might give birth to a Negro
baby. I hoped to save my reputation by telling you a deliberate lie." Her
husband, horrified by the confession, had Offett, who had already served
four years, released and secured a divorce.

There have been many such cases throughout the South, with the difference
that the Southern white men in insensate fury wreak their vengeance
without intervention of law upon the Negro who consorts with their women.


TRIED TO MANUFACTURE AN OUTRAGE

The _Memphis (Tenn.) Ledger_, of June 8, 1892, has the following:

  If Lillie Bailey, a rather pretty white girl, seventeen years of age,
  who is now at the city hospital, would be somewhat less reserved about
  her disgrace there would be some very nauseating details in the story of
  her life. She is the mother of a little coon. The truth might reveal
  fearful depravity or the evidence of a rank outrage. She will not
  divulge the name of the man who has left such black evidence of her
  disgrace, and in fact says it is a matter in which there can be no
  interest to the outside world. She came to Memphis nearly three months
  ago, and was taken in at the Woman's Refuge in the southern part of the
  city. She remained there until a few weeks ago when the child was born.
  The ladies in charge of the Refuge were horrified. The girl was at once
  sent to the city hospital, where she has been since May 30. She is a
  country girl. She came to Memphis from her father's farm, a short
  distance from Hernando, Miss. Just when she left there she would not
  say. In fact she says she came to Memphis from Arkansas, and says her
  home is in that state. She is rather good looking, has blue eyes, a low
  forehead and dark red hair. The ladies at the Woman's Refuge do not know
  anything about the girl further than what they learned when she was an
  inmate of the institution; and she would not tell much. When the child
  was born an attempt was made to get the girl to reveal the name of the
  Negro who had disgraced her, she obstinately refused and it was
  impossible to elicit any information from her on the subject.

Note the wording: "The truth might reveal fearful depravity or rank
outrage." If it had been a white child or if Lillie Bailey had told a
pitiful story of Negro outrage, it would have been a case of woman's
weakness or assault and she could have remained at the Woman's Refuge. But
a Negro child and to withhold its father's name and thus prevent the
killing of another Negro "rapist" was a case of "fearful depravity." Had
she revealed the father's name, he would have been lynched and his taking
off charged to an assault upon a white woman.


BURNED ALIVE FOR ADULTERY

In Texarkana, Arkansas, Edward Coy was accused of assaulting a white
woman. The press dispatches of February 18, 1892, told in detail how he
was tied to a tree, the flesh cut from his body by men and boys, and after
coal oil was poured over him, the woman he had assaulted gladly set fire
to him, and 15,000 persons saw him burn to death. October 1, the _Chicago
Inter Ocean_ contained the following account of that horror from the pen
of the "Bystander" Judge Albion W. Tourgee--as the result of his
investigations:

  1. The woman who was paraded as victim of violence was of bad character;
  her husband was a drunkard and a gambler.

  2. She was publicly reported and generally known to have been criminally
  intimate with Coy for more than a year previous.

  3. She was compelled by threats, if not by violence, to make the charge
  against the victim.

  4. When she came to apply the match Coy asked her if she would burn him
  after they had "been sweethearting" so long.

  5. A large majority of the "superior" white men prominent in the affair
  are the reputed fathers of mulatto children.

  These are not pleasant facts, but they are illustrative of the vital
  phase of the so-called race question, which should properly be
  designated an earnest inquiry as to the best methods by which religion,
  science, law and political power may be employed to excuse injustice,
  barbarity and crime done to a people because of race and color. There
  can be no possible belief that these people were inspired by any
  consuming zeal to vindicate God's law against miscegenationists of the
  most practical sort. The woman was a willing partner in the victim's
  guilt, and being of the "superior" race must naturally have been more
  guilty.


NOT IDENTIFIED BUT LYNCHED

February 11, 1893, there occurred in Shelby County, Tennessee, the fourth
Negro lynching within fifteen months. The three first were lynched in the
city of Memphis for firing on white men in self-defense. This Negro,
Richard Neal, was lynched a few miles from the city limits, and the
following is taken from the _Memphis (Tenn.) Scimitar_:

  As the _Scimitar_ stated on Saturday the Negro, Richard Neal, who raped
  Mrs. Jack White near Forest Hill, in this county, was lynched by a mob
  of about 200 white citizens of the neighborhood. Sheriff McLendon,
  accompanied by Deputies Perkins, App and Harvey and a _Scimitar_
  reporter, arrived on the scene of the execution about 3:30 in the
  afternoon. The body was suspended from the first limb of a post oak tree
  by a new quarter-inch grass rope. A hangman's knot, evidently tied by an
  expert, fitted snugly under the left ear of the corpse, and a new hame
  string pinioned the victim's arms behind him. His legs were not tied.
  The body was perfectly limber when the Sheriff's posse cut it down and
  retained enough heat to warm the feet of Deputy Perkins, whose road cart
  was converted into a hearse. On arriving with the body at Forest Hill
  the Sheriff made a bargain with a stalwart young man with a blonde
  mustache and deep blue eyes, who told the _Scimitar_ reporter that he
  was the leader of the mob, to haul the body to Germantown for $3.

  When within half-a-mile of Germantown the Sheriff and posse were
  overtaken by Squire McDonald of Collierville, who had come down to hold
  the inquest. The Squire had his jury with him, and it was agreed for the
  convenience of all parties that he should proceed with the corpse to
  Germantown and conduct the inquiry as to the cause of death. He did so,
  and a verdict of death from hanging by parties unknown was returned in
  due form.

  The execution of Neal was done deliberately and by the best people of
  the Collierville, Germantown and Forest Hill neighborhoods, without
  passion or exhibition of anger.

  He was arrested on Friday about ten o'clock, by Constable Bob Cash, who
  carried him before Mrs. White. She said: "I think he is the man. I am
  almost certain of it. If he isn't the man he is exactly like him."

  The Negro's coat was torn also, and there were other circumstances
  against him. The committee returned and made its report, and the
  chairman put the question of guilt or innocence to a vote.

  All who thought the proof strong enough to warrant execution were
  invited to cross over to the other side of the road. Everybody but four
  or five negroes crossed over.

  The committee then placed Neal on a mule with his arms tied behind him,
  and proceeded to the scene of the crime, followed by the mob. The rope,
  with a noose already prepared, was tied to the limb nearest the spot
  where the unpardonable sin was committed, and the doomed man's mule was
  brought to a standstill beneath it.

  Then Neal confessed. He said he was the right man, but denied that he
  used force or threats to accomplish his purpose. It was a matter of
  purchase, he claimed, and said the price paid was twenty-five cents. He
  warned the colored men present to beware of white women and resist
  temptation, for to yield to their blandishments or to the passions of
  men, meant death.

  While he was speaking, Mrs. White came from her home and calling
  Constable Cash to one side, asked if he could not save the Negro's life.
  The reply was, "No," and Mrs. White returned to the house.

  When all was in readiness, the husband of Neal's victim leaped upon the
  mule's back and adjusted the rope around the Negro's neck. No cap was
  used, and Neal showed no fear, nor did he beg for mercy. The mule was
  struck with a whip and bounded out from under Neal, leaving him
  suspended in the air with his feet about three feet from the ground.


DELIVERED TO THE MOB BY THE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

John Peterson, near Denmark, S.C., was suspected of rape, but escaped,
went to Columbia, and placed himself under Gov. Tillman's protection,
declaring he too could prove an alibi by white witnesses. A white reporter
hearing his declaration volunteered to find these witnesses, and
telegraphed the governor that he would be in Columbia with them on Monday.
In the meantime the mob at Denmark, learning Peterson's whereabouts, went
to the governor and demanded the prisoner. Gov. Tillman, who had during
his canvass for reelection the year before, declared that he would lead a
mob to lynch a Negro that assaulted a white woman, gave Peterson up to the
mob. He was taken back to Denmark, and the white girl in the case as
positively declared that he was not the man. But the verdict of the mob
was that "the crime had been committed and somebody had to hang for it,
and if he, Peterson, was not guilty of that he was of some other crime,"
and he was hung, and his body riddled with 1,000 bullets.


LYNCHED AS A WARNING

Alabama furnishes a case in point. A colored man named Daniel Edwards,
lived near Selma, Alabama, and worked for a family of a farmer near that
place. This resulted in an intimacy between the young man and a daughter
of the householder, which finally developed in the disgrace of the girl.
After the birth of the child, the mother disclosed the fact that Edwards
was its father. The relationship had been sustained for more than a year,
and yet this colored man was apprehended, thrown into jail from whence he
was taken by a mob of one hundred neighbors and hung to a tree and his
body riddled with bullets. A dispatch which describes the lynching, ends
as follows. "Upon his back was found pinned this morning the following:
'Warning to all Negroes that are too intimate with white girls. This the
work of one hundred best citizens of the South Side.'"

There can be no doubt from the announcement made by this "one hundred best
citizens" that they understood full well the character of the relationship
which existed between Edwards and the girl, but when the dispatches were
sent out, describing the affair, it was claimed that Edwards was lynched
for rape.


SUPPRESSING THE TRUTH

In a county in Mississippi during the month of July the Associated Press
dispatches sent out a report that the sheriff's eight-year-old daughter
had been assaulted by a big, black, burly brute who had been promptly
lynched. The facts which have since been investigated show that the girl
was more than eighteen years old and that she was discovered by her father
in this young man's room who was a servant on the place. But these facts
the Associated Press has not given to the world, nor did the same agency
acquaint the world with the fact that a Negro youth who was lynched in
Tuscumbia, Ala., the same year on the same charge told the white girl who
accused him before the mob, that he had met her in the woods often by
appointment. There is a young mulatto in one of the State prisons of the
South today who is there by charge of a young white woman to screen
herself. He is a college graduate and had been corresponding with, and
clandestinely visiting her until he was surprised and run out of her room
en deshabille by her father. He was put in prison in another town to save
his life from the mob and his lawyer advised that it were better to save
his life by pleading guilty to charges made and being sentenced for years,
than to attempt a defense by exhibiting the letters written him by this
girl. In the latter event, the mob would surely murder him, while there
was a chance for his life by adopting the former course. Names, places and
dates are not given for the same reason.

The excuse has come to be so safe, it is not surprising that a
Philadelphia girl, beautiful and well educated, and of good family, should
make a confession published in all the daily papers of that city October,
1894, that she had been stealing for some time, and that to cover one of
her thefts, she had said she had been bound and gagged in her father's
house by a colored man, and money stolen therefrom by him. Had this been
done in many localities, it would only have been necessary for her to
"identify" the first Negro in that vicinity, to have brought about another
lynching bee.


A VILE SLANDER WITH SCANT RETRACTION

The following published in the _Cleveland (Ohio) Leader_ of Oct. 23, 1894,
only emphasizes our demand that a fair trial shall be given those accused
of crime, and the protection of the law be extended until time for a
defense be granted.

  The sensational story sent out last night from Hicksville that a Negro
  had outraged a little four-year-old girl proves to be a base canard. The
  correspondents who went into the details should have taken the pains to
  investigate, and the officials should have known more of the matter
  before they gave out such grossly exaggerated information.

  The Negro, Charles O'Neil, had been working for a couple of women and,
  it seems, had worked all winter without being remunerated. There is a
  little girl, and the girl's mother and grandmother evidently started the
  story with idea of frightening the Negro out of the country and thus
  balancing accounts. The town was considerably wrought up and for a time
  things looked serious. The accused had a preliminary hearing today and
  not an iota of evidence was produced to indicate that such a crime had
  been committed, or that he had even attempted such an outrage. The
  village marshal was frightened nearly out of his wits and did little to
  quiet the excitement last night.

  The affair was an outrage on the Negro, at the expense of innocent
  childhood, a brainless fabrication from start to finish.

The original story was sent throughout this country and England, but the
_Cleveland Leader_, so far as known, is the only journal which has
published these facts in refutation of the slander so often published
against the race. Not only is it true that many of the alleged cases of
rape against the Negro, are like the foregoing, but the same crime
committed by white men against Negro women and girls, is never punished by
mob or the law. A leading journal in South Carolina openly said some
months ago that "it is not the same thing for a white man to assault a
colored woman as for a colored man to assault a white woman, because the
colored woman had no finer feelings nor virtue to be outraged!" Yet
colored women have always had far more reason to complain of white men in
this respect than ever white women have had of Negroes.


ILLINOIS HAS A LYNCHING

In the month of June, 1893, the proud commonwealth of Illinois joined the
ranks of Lynching States. Illinois, which gave to the world the immortal
heroes, Lincoln, Grant and Logan, trailed its banner of justice in the
dust--dyed its hands red in the blood of a man not proven guilty of crime.

June 3,1893, the country about Decatur, one of the largest cities of the
state was startled with the cry that a white woman had been assaulted by a
colored tramp. Three days later a colored man named Samuel Bush was
arrested and put in jail. A white man testified that Bush, on the day of
the assault, asked him where he could get a drink and he pointed to the
house where the farmer's wife was subsequently said to have been
assaulted. Bush said he went to the well but did not go near the house,
and did not assault the woman. After he was arrested the alleged victim
did not see him to identify him--he was presumed to be guilty.

The citizens determined to kill him. The mob gathered, went to the jail,
met with no resistance, took the suspected man, dragged him out tearing
every stitch of clothing from his body, then hanged him to a telegraph
pole. The grand jury refused to indict the lynchers though the names of
over twenty persons who were leaders in the mob were well known. In fact
twenty-two persons were indicted, but the grand jurors and the prosecuting
attorney disagreed as to the form of the indictments, which caused the
jurors to change their minds. All indictments were reconsidered and the
matter was dropped. Not one of the dozens of men prominent in that murder
have suffered a whit more inconvenience for the butchery of that man, than
they would have suffered for shooting a dog.


COLOR LINE JUSTICE

In Baltimore, Maryland, a gang of white ruffians assaulted a respectable
colored girl who was out walking with a young man of her own race. They
held her escort and outraged the girl. It was a deed dastardly enough to
arouse Southern blood, which gives its horror of rape as excuse for
lawlessness, but she was a colored woman. The case went to the courts and
they were acquitted.

In Nashville, Tennessee, there was a white man, Pat Hanifan, who outraged
a little colored girl, and from the physical injuries received she was
ruined for life. He was jailed for six months, discharged, and is now a
detective in that city. In the same city, last May, a white man outraged a
colored girl in a drug store. He was arrested and released on bail at the
trial. It was rumored that five hundred colored men had organized to lynch
him. Two hundred and fifty white citizens armed themselves with
Winchesters and guarded him. A cannon was placed in front of his home, and
the Buchanan Rifles (State Militia) ordered to the scene for his
protection. The colored mob did not show up. Only two weeks before, Eph.
Grizzard, who had only been charged with rape upon a white woman, had been
taken from the jail, with Governor Buchanan and the police and militia
standing by, dragged through the streets in broad daylight, knives plunged
into him at every step, and with every fiendish cruelty that a frenzied
mob could devise, he was at last swung out on the bridge with hands cut to
pieces as he tried to climb up the stanchions. A naked, bloody example of
the bloodthirstiness of the nineteenth-century civilization of the Athens
of the South! No cannon nor military were called out in his defense. He
dared to visit a white woman.

At the very moment when these civilized whites were announcing their
determination "to protect their wives and daughters," by murdering
Grizzard, a white man was in the same jail for raping eight-year-old
Maggie Reese, a colored girl. He was not harmed. The "honor" of grown
women who were glad enough to be supported by the Grizzard boys and Ed.
Coy, as long as the liaison was not known, needed protection; they were
white. The outrage upon helpless childhood needed no avenging in this
case; she was black.

A white man in Guthrie, Oklahoma Territory, two months after inflicted
such injuries upon another colored girl that she died. He was not
punished, but an attempt was made in the same town in the month of June to
lynch a colored man who visited a white woman.

In Memphis, Tennessee, in the month of June, Ellerton L. Dorr, who is the
husband of Russell Hancock's widow, was arrested for attempted rape on
Mattie Cole, a neighbor's cook; he was only prevented from accomplishing
his purpose by the appearance of Mattie's employer. Dorr's friends say he
was drunk and, not responsible for his actions. The grand jury refused to
indict him and he was discharged.

In Tallahassee, Florida, a colored girl, Charlotte Gilliam, was assaulted
by white men. Her father went to have a warrant for their arrest issued,
but the judge refused to issue it.

In Bowling Green, Virginia, Moses Christopher, a colored lad, was charged
with assault, September 10. He was indicted, tried, convicted and
sentenced to death in one day. In the same state at Danville, two weeks
before--August 29, Thomas J. Penn, a white man, committed a criminal
assault upon Lina Hanna, a twelve-year-old colored girl, but he has not
been tried, certainly not killed either by the law or the mob.

In Surrey county, Virginia, C.L. Brock, a white man, criminally assaulted
a ten-year-old colored girl, and threatened to kill her if she told.
Notwithstanding, she confessed to her aunt, Mrs. Alice Bates, and the
white brute added further crime by killing Mrs. Bates when she upbraided
him about his crime upon her niece. He emptied the contents of his
revolver into her body as she lay. Brock has never been apprehended, and
no effort has been made to do so by the legal authorities.

But even when punishment is meted out by law to white villians for this
horrible crime, it is seldom or never that capital punishment is invoked.
Two cases just clipped from the daily papers will suffice to show how this
crime is punished when committed by white offenders and black.

LOUISVILLE, KY., October 19.--Smith Young, colored, was today sentenced to
be hanged. Young criminally assaulted a six-year-old child about six
months ago.

Jacques Blucher, the Pontiac Frenchman who was arrested at that place for
a criminal assault on his daughter Fanny on July 29 last, pleaded nolo
contendere when placed on trial at East Greenwich, near Providence, R.I.,
Tuesday, and was sentenced to five years in State Prison.

Charles Wilson was convicted of assault upon seven-year-old Mamie Keys in
Philadelphia, in October, and sentenced to ten years in prison. He was
white. Indianapolis courts sentenced a white man in September to eight
years in prison for assault upon a twelve-year-old white girl.

April 24, 1893, a lynching was set for Denmark, S.C., on the charge of
rape. A white girl accused a Negro of assault, and the mob was about to
lynch him. A few hours before the lynching three reputable white men rode
into the town and solemnly testified that the accused Negro was at work
with them 25 miles away on the day and at the hour the crime had been
committed. He was accordingly set free. A white person's word is taken as
absolutely for as against a Negro.




7

THE CRUSADE JUSTIFIED

_(Appeal from America to the World_)


It has been urged in criticism of the movement appealing to the English
people for sympathy and support in our crusade against Lynch Law that our
action was unpatriotic, vindictive and useless. It is not a part of the
plan of this pamphlet to make any defense for that crusade nor to indict
any apology for the motives which led to the presentation of the facts of
American lynchings to the world at large. To those who are not willfully
blind and unjustly critical, the record of more than a thousand lynchings
in ten years is enough to justify any peaceable movement tending to
ameliorate the conditions which led to this unprecedented slaughter of
human beings.

If America would not hear the cry of men, women and children whose dying
groans ascended to heaven praying for relief, not only for them but for
others who might soon be treated as they, then certainly no fair-minded
person can charge disloyalty to those who make an appeal to the
civilization of the world for such sympathy and help as it is possible to
extend. If stating the facts of these lynchings, as they appeared from
time to time in the white newspapers of America--the news gathered by
white correspondents, compiled by white press bureaus and disseminated
among white people--shows any vindictiveness, then the mind which so
charges is not amenable to argument.

But it is the desire of this pamphlet to urge that the crusade started and
thus far continued has not been useless, but has been blessed with the
most salutary results. The many evidences of the good results can not here
be mentioned, but the thoughtful student of the situation can himself
find ample proof. There need not here be mentioned the fact that for the
first time since lynching began, has there been any occasion for the
governors of the several states to speak out in reference to these crimes
against law and order.

No matter how heinous the act of the lynchers may have been, it was
discussed only for a day or so and then dismissed from the attention of
the public. In one or two instances the governor has called attention to
the crime, but the civil processes entirely failed to bring the murderers
to justice. Since the crusade against lynching was started, however,
governors of states, newspapers, senators and representatives and bishops
of churches have all been compelled to take cognizance of the prevalence
of this crime and to speak in one way or another in the defense of the
charge against this barbarism in the United States. This has not been
because there was any latent spirit of justice voluntarily asserting
itself, especially in those who do the lynching, but because the entire
American people now feel, both North and South, that they are objects in
the gaze of the civilized world and that for every lynching humanity asks
that America render its account to civilization and itself.


AWFUL BARBARISM IGNORED

Much has been said during the months of September and October of 1894
about the lynching of six colered men who on suspicion of incendiarism
were made the victims of a most barbarous massacre.

They were arrested, one by one, by officers of the law; they were
handcuffed and chained together and by the officers of the law loaded in a
wagon and deliberately driven into an ambush where a mob of lynchers
awaited them. At the time and upon the chosen spot, in the darkness of the
night and far removed from the habitation of any human soul, the wagon was
halted and the mob fired upon the six manacled men, shooting them to death
as no humane person would have shot dogs. Chained together as they were,
in their awful struggles after the first volley, the victims tumbled out
of the wagon upon the ground and there in the mud, struggling in their
death throes, the victims were made the target of the murderous shotguns,
which fired into the writhing, struggling, dying mass of humanity, until
every spark of life was gone. Then the officers of the law who had them in
charge, drove away to give the alarm and to tell the world that they had
been waylaid and their prisoners forcibly taken from them and killed.

It has been claimed that the prompt, vigorous and highly commendable steps
of the governor of the State of Tennessee and the judge having
jurisdiction over the crime, and of the citizens of Memphis generally, was
the natural revolt of the humane conscience in that section of the
country, and the determination of honest and honorable men to rid the
community of such men as those who were guilty of this terrible massacre.
It has further been claimed that this vigorous uprising of the people and
this most commendably prompt action of the civil authorities, is ample
proof that the American people will not tolerate the lynching of innocent
men, and that in cases where brutal lynchings have not been promptly dealt
with, the crimes on the part of the victims were such as to put them
outside the pale of humanity and that the world considered their death a
necessary sacrifice for the good of all.

But this line of argument can in no possible way be truthfully sustained.
The lynching of the six men in 1894, barbarous as it was, was in no way
more barbarous than took nothing more than a passing notice. It was only
the other lynchings which preceded it, and of which the public fact that
the attention of the civilized world has been called to lynching in
America which made the people of Tennessee feel the absolute necessity for
a prompt, vigorous and just arraignment of all the murderers connected
with that crime. Lynching is no longer "Our Problem," it is the problem of
the civilized world, and Tennessee could not afford to refuse the legal
measures which Christianity demands shall be used for the punishment of
crime.


MEMPHIS THEN AND NOW

Only two years prior to the massacre of the six men near Memphis, that
same city took part in a massacre in every way as bloody and brutal as
that of September last. It was the murder of three young colored men and
who were known to be among the most honorable, reliable, worthy and
peaceable colored citizens of the community. All of them were engaged in
the mercantile business, being members of a corporation which conducted a
large grocery store, and one of the three being a letter carrier in the
employ of the government. These three men were arrested for resisting an
attack of a mob upon their store, in which melee none of the assailants,
who had armed themselves for their devilish deeds by securing court
processes, were killed or even seriously injured. But these three men were
put in jail, and on three or four nights after their incarceration a mob
of less than a dozen men, by collusion with the civil authorities, entered
the jail, took the three men from the custody of the law and shot them to
death. Memphis knew of this awful crime, knew then and knows today who the
men were who committed it, and yet not the first step was ever taken to
apprehend the guilty wretches who walk the streets today with the brand of
murder upon their foreheads, but as safe from harm as the most upright
citizen of that community. Memphis would have been just as calm and
complacent and self-satisfied over the murder of the six colored men in
1894 as it was over these three colored men in 1892, had it not recognized
the fact that to escape the brand of barbarism it had not only to speak
its denunciation but to act vigorously in vindication of its name.


AN ALABAMA HORROR IGNORED

A further instance of this absolute disregard of every principle of
justice and the indifference to the barbarism of Lynch Law may be cited
here, and is furnished by white residents in the city of Carrolton,
Alabama. Several cases of arson had been discovered, and in their search
for the guilty parties, suspicion was found to rest upon three men and a
woman. The four suspects were Paul Hill, Paul Archer, William Archer, his
brother, and a woman named Emma Fair. The prisoners were apprehended,
earnestly asserted their innocence, but went to jail without making any
resistance. They claimed that they could easily prove their innocence upon
trial.

One would suspect that the civilization which defends itself against the
barbarisms of Lynch Law by stating that it lynches human beings only when
they are guilty of awful attacks upon women and children, would have been
very careful to have given these four prisoners, who were simply charged
with arson, a fair trial, to which they were entitled upon every principle
of law and humanity. Especially would this seem to be the case when if is
considered that one of the prisoners charged was a woman, and if the
nineteenth century has shown any advancement upon any lines of human
action, it is preeminently shown in its reverence, respect and protection
of its womanhood. But the people of Alabama failed to have any regard for
womanhood whatever.

The three men and the woman were put in jail to await trial. A few days
later it was rumored that they were to be subjects of Lynch Law, and, sure
enough, at night a mob of lynchers went to the jail, not to avenge any
awful crime against womanhood, but to kill four people who had been
suspected of setting a house on fire. They were caged in their cells,
helpless and defenseless; they were at the mercy of civilized white
Americans, who, armed with shotguns, were there to maintain the majesty of
American law. And most effectively was their duty done by these splendid
representatives of Governor Fishback's brave and honorable white
southerners, who resent "outside interference." They lined themselves up
in the most effective manner and poured volley after volley into the
bodies of their helpless, pleading victims, who in their bolted prison
cells could do nothing but suffer and die. Then these lynchers went
quietly away and the bodies of the woman and three men were taken out and
buried with as little ceremony as men would bury hogs.

No one will say that the massacre near Memphis in 1894 was any worse than
this bloody crime of Alabama in 1892. The details of this shocking affair
were given to the public by the press, but public sentiment was not moved
to action in the least; it was only a matter of a day's notice and then
went to swell the list of murders which stand charged against the noble,
Christian people of Alabama.


AMERICA AWAKENED

But there is now an awakened conscience throughout the land, and Lynch Law
can not flourish in the future as it has in the past. The close of the
year 1894 witnessed an aroused interest, an assertative humane principle
which must tend to the extirpation of that crime. The awful butchery last
mentioned failed to excite more than a passing comment In 1894, but far
different is it today. Gov. Jones, of Alabama, in 1893 dared to speak out
against the rule of the mob in no uncertain terms. His address indicated a
most helpful result of the present agitation. In face of the many denials
of the outrages on the one hand and apologies for lynchers on the other,
Gov. Jones admits the awful lawlessness charged and refuses to join in
the infamous plea made to condone the crime. No stronger nor more
effective words have been said than those following from Gov. Jones.

  While the ability of the state to deal with open revolts against the
  supremacy of its laws has been ably demonstrated, I regret that
  deplorable acts of violence have been perpetrated, in at least four
  instances, within the past two years by mobs, whose sudden work and
  quick dispersions rendered it impossible to protect their victims.
  Within the past two years nine prisoners, who were either in jail or in
  the custody of the officers, have been taken from them without
  resistance, and put to death. There was doubt of the guilt of the
  defendants in most of these cases, and few of them were charged with
  capital offenses. None of them involved the crime of rape. The largest
  rewards allowed by law were offered for the apprehension of the
  offenders, and officers were charged to a vigilant performance of their
  duties, and aided in some instances by the services of skilled
  detectives; but not a single arrest has been made and the grand juries
  in these counties have returned no bills of indictment. This would
  indicate either that local public sentiment approved these acts of
  violence or was too weak to punish them, or that the officers charged
  with that duty were in some way lacking in their performance. The evil
  cannot be cured or remedied by silence as to its existence. Unchecked,
  it will continue until it becomes a reproach to our good name, and a
  menace to our prosperity and peace; and it behooves you to exhaust all
  remedies within your power to find better preventives for such crimes.


A FRIENDLY WARNING

From England comes a friendly voice which must give to every patriotic
citizen food for earnese thought. Writing from London, to the _Chicago
Inter Ocean_, Nov. 25, 1894, the distinguished compiler of our last
census, Hon. Robert P. Porter, gives the American people a most
interesting review of the antilynching crusade in England, submitting
editorial opinions from all sections of England and Scotland, showing the
consensus of British opinion on this subject. It hardly need be said, that
without exception, the current of English thought deprecates the rule of
mob law, and the conscience of England is shocked by the revelation made
during the present crusade. In his letter Mr. Porter says:

  While some English journals have joined certain American journals in
  ridiculing the well-meaning people who have formed the antilynching
  committee, there is a deep under current on this subject which is
  injuring the Southern States far more than those who have not been drawn
  into the question of English investment for the South as I have can
  surmise. This feeling is by no means all sentiment. An Englishman whose
  word and active cooperation could send a million sterling to any
  legitimate Southern enterprise said the other day: "I will not invest a
  farthing in States where these horrors occur. I have no particular
  sympathy with the antilynching committee, but such outrages indicate to
  my mind that where life is held to be of such little value there is even
  less assurance that the laws will protect property. As I understand it
  the States, not the national government, control in such matters, and
  where those laws are strongest there is the best field for British
  capital."

Probably the most bitter attack on the antilynching committee has come
from the _London Times_. Those Southern Governors who had their bombastic
letters published in the _Times_, with favorable editorial comment, may
have had their laugh at the antilynchers here too soon. A few days ago, in
commenting on an interesting communication from Richard H. Edmonds, editor
of the _Manufacturer's Record_, setting forth the industrial advantages of
the Southern States, which was published in its columns, the _Times_ says:

  Without in any way countenancing the impertinence of "antilynching"
  committee, we may say that a state of things in which the killing of
  Negroes by bloodthirsty mobs is an incident of not unfrequent occurrence
  is not conducive to success in industry. Its existence, however, is a
  serious obstacle to the success of the South in industry; for even now
  Negro labor, which means at best inefficient labor, must be largely
  relied on there, and its efficiency must be still further diminished by
  spasmodic terrorism.

  Those interested in the development of the resources of the Southern
  States, and no one in proportion to his means has shown more faith in
  the progress of the South than the writer of this article, must take
  hold of this matter earnestly and intelligently. Sneering at the
  antilynching committee will do no good. Back of them, in fact, if not in
  form, is the public opinion of Great Britain. Even the _Times_ cannot
  deny this. It may not be generally known in the United States, but while
  the Southern and some of the Northern newspapers are making a target of
  Miss Wells, the young colored woman who started this English movement,
  and cracking their jokes at the expense of Miss Florence Balgarnie, who,
  as honorable secretary, conducts the committee's correspondence, the
  strongest sort of sentiment is really at the back of the movement. Here
  we have crystallized every phase of political opinion. Extreme Unionists
  like the Duke of Argyll and advanced home rulers such as Justin
  McCarthy; Thomas Burt, the labor leader; Herbert Burrows, the Socialist,
  and Tom Mann, representing all phases of the Labor party, are
  cooperating with conservatives like Sir T. Eldon Gorst. But the real
  strength of this committee is not visible to the casual observer. As a
  matter of fact it represents many of the leading and most powerful
  British journals. A.E. Fletcher is editor of the _London Daily
  Chronicle_; P.W. Clayden is prominent in the counsels of the _London
  Daily News_; Professor James Stuart is Gladstone's great friend and
  editor of the _London Star_, William Byles is editor and proprietor of
  the _Bradford Observer_, Sir Hugh Gilzen Reid is a leading Birmingham
  editor; in short, this committee has secured if not the leading editors,
  certainly important and warm friends, representing the Manchester
  Guardian, the _Leeds Mercury_, the _Plymouth Western News, Newcastle
  Leader_, the _London Daily Graphic_, the _Westminster Gazette_, the
  _London Echo_, a host of minor papers all over the kingdom, and
  practically the entire religious press of the kingdom.

  The greatest victory for the antilynchers comes this morning in the
  publication in the _London Times_ of William Lloyd Garrison's letter.
  This letter will have immense effect here. It may have been printed in
  full in the United States, but nevertheless I will quote a paragraph
  which will strengthen the antilynchers greatly in their crusade here:

  A year ago the South derided and resented Northern protests; today it
  listens, explains and apologizes for its uncovered cruelties. Surely a
  great triumph for a little woman to accomplish! It is the power of truth
  simply and unreservedly spoken, for her language was inadequate to
  describe the horrors exposed.

If the Southern states are wise, and I say this with the earnestness of a
friend and one who has built a home in the mountain regions of the South
and thrown his lot in with them, they will not only listen, but stop
lawlessness of all kinds. If they do, and thus secure the confidence of
Englishmen, we may in the next decade realize some of the hopes for the
new South we have so fondly cherished.




8

MISS WILLARD'S ATTITUDE


No class of American citizens stands in greater need of the humane and
thoughtful consideration of all sections of our country than do the
colored people, nor does any class exceed us in the measure of grateful
regard for acts of kindly interest in our behalf. It is, therefore, to us,
a matter of keen regret that a Christian organization, so large and
influential as the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, should refuse to
give its sympathy and support to our oppressed people who ask no further
favor than the promotion of public sentiment which shall guarantee to
every person accused of crime the safeguard of a fair and impartial trial,
and protection from butchery by brutal mobs. Accustomed as we are to the
indifference and apathy of Christian people, we would bear this instance
of ill fortune in silence, had not Miss Willard gone out of her way to
antagonize the cause so dear to our hearts by including in her Annual
Address to the W.C.T.U. Convention at Cleveland, November 5, 1894, a
studied, unjust and wholly unwarranted attack upon our work.

In her address Miss Willard said:

  The zeal for her race of Miss Ida B. Wells, a bright young colored
  woman, has, it seems to me, clouded her perception as to who were her
  friends and well-wishers in all high-minded and legitimate efforts to
  banish the abomination of lynching and torture from the land of the free
  and the home of the brave. It is my firm belief that in the statements
  made by Miss Wells concerning white women having taken the initiative
  in nameless acts between the races she has put an imputation upon half
  the white race in this country that is unjust, and, save in the rarest
  exceptional instances, wholly without foundation. This is the unanimous
  opinion of the most disinterested and observant leaders of opinion whom
  I have consulted on the subject, and I do not fear to say that the
  laudable efforts she is making are greatly handicapped by statements of
  this kind, nor to urge her as a friend and well-wisher to banish from
  her vocabulary all such allusions as a source of weakness to the cause
  she has at heart.

This paragraph, brief as it is, contains two statements which have not the
slightest foundation in fact. At no time, nor in any place, have I made
statements "concerning white women having taken the initiative in nameless
acts between the races." Further, at no time, or place nor under any
circumstance, have I directly or inferentially "put an imputation upon
half the white race in this country" and I challenge this "friend and
well-wisher" to give proof of the truth of her charge. Miss Willard
protests against lynching in one paragraph and then, in the next,
deliberately misrepresents my position in order that she may criticise a
movement, whose only purpose is to protect our oppressed race from
vindictive slander and Lynch Law.

What I have said and what I now repeat--in answer to her first charge--is,
that colored men have been lynched for assault upon women, when the facts
were plain that the relationship between the victim lynched and the
alleged victim of his assault was voluntary, clandestine and illicit. For
that very reason we maintain, that, in every section of our land, the
accused should have a fair, impartial trial, so that a man who is colored
shall not be hanged for an offense, which, if he were white, would not be
adjudged a crime. Facts cited in another chapter--"History of Some Cases
of Rape"--amply maintain this position. The publication of these facts in
defense of the good name of the race casts no "imputation upon half the
white race in this country" and no such imputation can be inferred except
by persons deliberately determined to be unjust.

But this is not the only injury which this cause has suffered at the hands
of our "friend and well-wisher." It has been said that the Women's
Christian Temperance Union, the most powerful organization of women in
America, was misrepresented by me while I was in England. Miss Willard was
in England at the time and knowing that no such misrepresentation came to
her notice, she has permitted that impression to become fixed and
widespread, when a word from her would have made the facts plain.

I never at any time or place or in any way misrepresented that
organization. When asked what concerted action had been taken by churches
and great moral agencies in America to put down Lynch Law, I was compelled
in truth to say that no such action had occurred, that pulpit, press and
moral agencies in the main were silent and for reasons known to
themselves, ignored the awful conditions which to the English people
appeared so abhorent. Then the question was asked what the great moral
reformers like Miss Frances Willard and Mr. Moody had done to suppress
Lynch Law and again I answered nothing. That Mr. Moody had never said a
word against lynching in any of his trips to the South, or in the North
either, so far as was known, and that Miss Willard's only public utterance
on the situation had condoned lynching and other unjust practices of the
South against the Negro. When proof of these statements was demanded, I
sent a letter containing a copy of the _New York Voice_, Oct. 23,1890, in
which appeared Miss Willard's own words of wholesale slander against the
colored race and condonation of Southern white people's outrages against
us. My letter in part reads as follows:

  But Miss Willard, the great temperance leader, went even further in
  putting the seal of her approval upon the southerners' method of dealing
  with the Negro. In October, 1890, the Women's Christian Temperance Union
  held its national meeting at Atlanta, Georgia. It was the first time in
  the history of the organization that it had gone south for a national
  meeting, and met the southerners in their own homes. They were welcomed
  with open arms. The governor of the state and the legislature gave
  special audiences in the halls of state legislation to the temperance
  workers. They set out to capture the northerners to their way of seeing
  things, and without troubling to hear the Negro side of the question,
  these temperance people accepted the white man's story of the problem
  with which he had to deal. State organizers were appointed that year,
  who had gone through the southern states since then, but in obedience to
  southern prejudices have confined their work to white persons only. It
  is only after Negroes are in prison for crimes that efforts of these
  temperance women are exerted without regard to "race, color, or previous
  condition." No "ounce of prevention" is used in their case; they are
  black, and if these women went among the Negroes for this work, the
  whites would not receive them. Except here and there, are found no
  temperance workers of the Negro race; "the great dark-faced mobs" are
  left the easy prey of the saloonkeepers.

  There was pending in the National Congress at this time a Federal
  Election Bill, the object being to give the National Government control
  of the national elections in the several states. Had this bill become a
  law, the Negro, whose vote has been systematically suppressed since 1875
  in the southern states, would have had the protection of the National
  Government, and his vote counted. The South would have been no longer
  "solid"; the Southerners saw that the balance of power which they
  unlawfully held in the House of Representatives and the Electoral
  College, based on the Negro population, would be wrested from them. So
  they nick-named the pending elections law the "Force Bill"--probably
  because it would force them to disgorge their ill-gotten political
  gains--and defeated it. While it was being discussed, the question was
  submitted to Miss Willard: "What do you think of the race problem and
  the Force Bill?"

  Said Miss Willard: "Now, as to the 'race problem' in its minified,
  current meaning, I am a true lover of the southern people--have spoken
  and worked in, perhaps, 200 of their towns and cities; have been taken
  into their love and confidence at scores of hospitable firesides; have
  heard them pour out their hearts in the splendid frankness of their
  impetuous natures. And I have said to them at such times: 'When I go
  North there will be wafted to you no word from pen or voice that is not
  loyal to what we are saying here and now.' Going South, a woman, a
  temperance woman, and a Northern temperance woman--three great barriers
  to their good will yonder--I was received by them with a confidence that
  was one of the most delightful surprises of my life. I think we have
  wronged the South, though we did not mean to do so. The reason was, in
  part, that we had irreparably wronged ourselves by putting no safeguards
  on the ballot box at the North that would sift out alien illiterates.
  They rule our cities today; the saloon is their palace, and the toddy
  stick their sceptre. It is not fair that they should vote, nor is it
  fair that a plantation Negro, who can neither read nor write, whose
  ideas are bounded by the fence of his own field and the price of his own
  mule, should be entrusted with the ballot. We ought to have put an
  educational test upon that ballot from the first. The Anglo-Saxon race
  will never submit to be dominated by the Negro so long as his altitude
  reaches no higher than the personal liberty of the saloon, and the power
  of appreciating the amount of liquor that a dollar will buy. New England
  would no more submit to this than South Carolina. 'Better whisky and
  more of it' has been the rallying cry of great dark-faced mobs in the
  Southern localities where local option was snowed under by the colored
  vote. Temperance has no enemy like that, for it is unreasoning and
  unreasonable. Tonight it promises in a great congregation to vote for
  temperance at the polls tomorrow; but tomorrow twenty-five cents changes
  that vote in favor of the liquor-seller.

  "I pity the southerners, and I believe the great mass of them are as
  conscientious and kindly intentioned toward the colored man as an equal
  number of white church-members of the North. Would-be demagogues lead
  the colored people to destruction. Half-drunken white roughs murder them
  at the polls, or intimidate them so that they do not vote. But the
  better class of people must not be blamed for this, and a more
  thoroughly American population than the Christian people of the South
  does not exist. They have the traditions, the kindness, the probity, the
  courage of our forefathers. The problem on their hands is immeasurable.
  The colored race multiplies like the locusts of Egypt. The grog-shop is
  its center of power. 'The safety of woman, of childhood, of the home, is
  menaced in a thousand localities at this moment, so that the men dare
  not go beyond the sight of their own roof-tree.' How little we know of
  all this, seated in comfort and affluence here at the North, descanting
  upon the rights of every man to cast one vote and have it fairly
  counted; that well-worn shibboleth invoked once more to dodge a living
  issue.

  "The fact is that illiterate colored men will not vote at the South
  until the white population chooses to have them do so; and under similar
  conditions they would not at the North." Here we have Miss Willard's
  words in full, condoning fraud, violence, murder, at the ballot box;
  rapine, shooting, hanging and burning; for all these things are done and
  being done now by the Southern white people. She does not stop there,
  but goes a step further to aid them in blackening the good name of an
  entire race, as shown by the sentences quoted in the paragraph above.
  These utterances, for which the colored people have never forgiven Miss
  Willard, and which Frederick Douglass has denounced as false, are to be
  found in full in the Voice of October 23,1890, a temperance organ
  published at New York City.

This letter appeared in the May number of _Fraternity_, the organ of the
first Anti-Lynching society of Great Britain. When Lady Henry Somerset
learned through Miss Florence Balgarnie that this letter had been
published she informed me that if the interview was published she would
take steps to let the public know that my statements must be received with
caution. As I had no money to pay the printer to suppress the edition
which was already published and these ladies did not care to do so, the
May number of _Fraternity_ was sent to its subscribers as usual. Three
days later there appeared in the daily _Westminster Gazette_ an
"interview" with Miss Willard, written by Lady Henry Somerset, which was
so subtly unjust in its wording that I was forced to reply in my own
defense. In that reply I made only statements which, like those concerning
Miss Willard's _Voice_ interview, have not been and cannot be denied. It
was as follows:

  LADY HENRY SOMERSET'S INTERVIEW WITH MISS WILLARD

  To the Editor of the _Westminster Gazette_: Sir--The interview published
  in your columns today hardly merits a reply, because of the indifference
  to suffering manifested. Two ladies are represented sitting under a tree
  at Reigate, and, after some preliminary remarks on the terrible subject
  of lynching, Miss Willard laughingly replies by cracking a joke. And the
  concluding sentence of the interview shows the object is not to
  determine how best they may help the Negro who is being hanged, shot and
  burned, but "to guard Miss Willard's reputation."

  With me it is not myself nor my reputation, but the life of my people,
  which is at stake, and I affirm that this is the first time to my
  knowledge that Miss Willard has said a single word in denunciation of
  lynching or demand for law. The year 1890, the one in which the
  interview appears, had a larger lynching record than any previous year,
  and the number and territory have increased, to say nothing of the human
  beings burnt alive.

  If so earnest as she would have the English public believe her to be,
  why was she silent when five minutes were given me to speak last June at
  Princes' Hall, and in Holborn Town Hall this May? I should say it was as
  President of the Women's Christian Temperance Union of America she is
  timid, because all these unions in the South emphasize the hatred of the
  Negro by excluding him. There is not a single colored woman admitted to
  the Southern W.C.T.U., but still Miss Willard blames the Negro for the
  defeat of Prohibition in the South. Miss Willard quotes from
  _Fraternity_, but forgets to add my immediate recognition of her
  presence on the platform at Holborn Town Hall, when, amidst many other
  resolutions on temperance and other subjects in which she is interested,
  time was granted to carry an anti-lynching resolution. I was so thankful
  for this crumb of her speechless presence that I hurried off to the
  editor of _Fraternity_ and added a postscript to my article blazoning
  forth that fact.

  Any statements I have made concerning Miss Willard are confirmed by the
  Hon. Frederick Douglass (late United States minister to Hayti) in a
  speech delivered by him in Washington in January of this year, which has
  since been published in a pamphlet. The fact is, Miss Willard is no
  better or worse than the great bulk of white Americans on the Negro
  questions. They are all afraid to speak out, and it is only British
  public opinion which will move them, as I am thankful to see it has
  already begun to move Miss Willard. I am, etc.,

  May 21

  IDA B. WELLS

Unable to deny the truth of these assertions, the charge has been made
that I have attacked Miss Willard and misrepresented the W.C.T.U. If to
state facts is misrepresentation, then I plead guilty to the charge.

I said then and repeat now, that in all the ten terrible years of
shooting, hanging and burning of men, women and children in America, the
Women's Christian Temperance Union never suggested one plan or made one
move to prevent those awful crimes. If this statement is untrue the
records of that organization would disprove it before the ink is dry. It
is clearly an issue of fact and in all fairness this charge of
misrepresentation should either be substantiated or withdrawn.

It is not necessary, however, to make any representation concerning the
W.C.T.U. and the lynching question. The record of that organization speaks
for itself. During all the years prior to the agitation begun against
Lynch Law, in which years men, women and children were scourged, hanged,
shot and burned, the W.C.T.U. had no word, either of pity or protest; its
great heart, which concerns itself about humanity the world over, was,
toward our cause, pulseless as a stone. Let those who deny this speak by
the record. Not until after the first British campaign, in 1893, was even
a resolution passed by the body which is the self-constituted guardian for
"God, home and native land."

Nor need we go back to other years. The annual session of that
organization held in Cleveland in November, 1894, made a record which
confirms and emphasizes the silence charged against it. At that session,
earnest efforts were made to secure the adoption of a resolution of
protest against lynching. At that very time two men were being tried for
the murder of six colored men who were arrested on charge of barn burning,
chained together, and on pretense of being taken to jail, were driven into
the woods where they were ambushed and all six shot to death. The six
widows of the butchered men had just finished the most pathetic recital
ever heard in any court room, and the mute appeal of twenty-seven orphans
for justice touched the stoutest hearts. Only two weeks prior to the
session, Gov. Jones of Alabama, in his last message to the retiring state
legislature, cited the fact that in the two years just past, nine colored
men had been taken from the legal authorities by lynching mobs and
butchered in cold blood--and not one of these victims was even charged
with an assault upon womanhood.

It was thought that this great organization, in face of these facts, would
not hesitate to place itself on record in a resolution of protest against
this awful brutality towards colored people. Miss Willard gave assurance
that such a resolution would be adopted, and that assurance was relied on.
The record of the session shows in what good faith that assurance was
kept. After recommending an expression against Lynch Law, the President
attacked the antilynching movement, deliberately misrepresenting my
position, and in her annual address, charging me with a statement I never
made.

Further than that, when the committee on resolutions reported their work,
not a word was said against lynching. In the interest of the cause I
smothered the resentment. I felt because of the unwarranted and unjust
attack of the President, and labored with members to secure an expression
of some kind, tending to abate the awful slaughter of my race. A
resolution against lynching was introduced by Mrs. Fessenden and read, and
then that great Christian body, which in its resolutions had expressed
itself in opposition to the social amusement of card playing, athletic
sports and promiscuous dancing; had protested against the licensing of
saloons, inveighed against tobacco, pledged its allegiance to the
Prohibition party, and thanked the Populist party in Kansas, the
Republican party in California and the Democratic party in the South,
wholly ignored the seven millions of colored people of this country whose
plea was for a word of sympathy and support for the movement in their
behalf. The resolution was not adopted, and the convention adjourned.

In the _Union Signal_ Dec. 6, 1894, among the resolutions is found this
one:

  Resolved, That the National W.C.T.U, which has for years counted among
  its departments that of peace and arbitration, is utterly opposed to all
  lawless acts in any and all parts of our common lands and it urges these
  principles upon the public, praying that the time may speedily come
  when no human being shall be condemned without due process of law; and
  when the unspeakable outrages which have so often provoked such
  lawlessness shall be banished from the world, and childhood, maidenhood
  and womanhood shall no more be the victims of atrocities worse than
  death.

This is not the resolution offered by Mrs. Fessenden. She offered the one
passed last year by the W.C.T.U. which was a strong unequivocal
denunciation of lynching. But she was told by the chairman of the
committee on resolutions, Mrs. Rounds, that there was already a lynching
resolution in the hands of the committee. Mrs. Fessenden yielded the floor
on that assurance, and no resolution of any kind against lynching was
submitted and none was voted upon, not even the one above, taken from the
columns of the _Union Signal_, the organ of the national W.C.T.U!

Even the wording of this resolution which was printed by the W.C.T.U.,
reiterates the false and unjust charge which has been so often made as an
excuse for lynchers. Statistics show that less than one-third of the
lynching victims are hanged, shot and burned alive for "unspeakable
outrages against womanhood, maidenhood and childhood;" and that nearly a
thousand, including women and children, have been lynched upon any pretext
whatsoever; and that all have met death upon the unsupported word of white
men and women. Despite these facts this resolution which was printed,
cloaks an apology for lawlessness, in the same paragraph which affects to
condemn it, where it speaks of "the unspeakable outrages which have so
often provoked such lawlessness."

Miss Willard told me the day before the resolutions were offered that the
Southern women present had held a caucus that day. This was after I, as
fraternal delegate from the Woman's Mite Missionary Society of the A.M.E.
Church at Cleveland, O., had been introduced to tender its greetings. In
so doing I expressed the hope of the colored women that the W.C.T.U. would
place itself on record as opposed to lynching which robbed them of
husbands, fathers, brothers and sons and in many cases of women as well.
No note was made either in the daily papers or the _Union Signal_ of that
introduction and greeting, although every other incident of that morning
was published. The failure to submit a lynching resolution and the wording
of the one above appears to have been the result of that Southern caucus.

On the same day I had a private talk with Miss Willard and told her she
had been unjust to me and the cause in her annual address, and asked that
she correct the statement that I had misrepresented the W.C.T.U, or that I
had "put an imputation on one-half the white race in this country." She
said that somebody in England told her it was a pity that I attacked the
white women of America. "Oh," said I, "then you went out of your way to
prejudice me and my cause in your annual address, not upon what you had
heard me say, but what somebody had told you I said?" Her reply was that I
must not blame her for her rhetorical expressions--that I had my way of
expressing things and she had hers. I told her I most assuredly did blame
her when those expressions were calculated to do such harm. I waited for
an honest an unequivocal retraction of her statements based on "hearsay."
Not a word of retraction or explanation was said in the convention and I
remained misrepresented before that body through her connivance and
consent.

The editorial notes in the _Union Signal_, Dec. 6, 1894, however, contains
the following:

  In her repudiation of the charges brought by Miss Ida Wells against
  white women as having taken the initiative in nameless crimes between
  the races, Miss Willard said in her annual address that this statement
  "put an unjust imputation upon half the white race." But as this
  expression has been misunderstood she desires to declare that she did
  not intend a literal interpretation to be given to the language used,
  but employed it to express a tendency that might ensue in public thought
  as a result of utterances so sweeping as some that have been made by
  Miss Wells.

Because this explanation is as unjust as the original offense, I am forced
in self-defense to submit this account of differences. I desire no quarrel
with the W.C.T.U., but my love for the truth is greater than my regard for
an alleged friend who, through ignorance or design misrepresents in the
most harmful way the cause of a long suffering race, and then unable to
maintain the truth of her attack excuses herself as it were by the wave of
the hand, declaring that "she did not intend a literal interpretation to
be given to the language used." When the lives of men, women and children
are at stake, when the inhuman butchers of innocents attempt to justify
their barbarism by fastening upon a whole race the obloque of the most
infamous of crimes, it is little less than criminal to apologize for the
butchers today and tomorrow to repudiate the apology by declaring it a
figure of speech.




9

LYNCHING RECORD FOR 1894



The following tables are based on statistics taken from the columns of the
_Chicago Tribune_, Jan. 1, 1895. They are a valuable appendix to the
foregoing pages. They show, among other things, that in Louisiana, April
23-28, eight Negroes were lynched because one white man was killed by the
Negro, the latter acting in self defense. Only seven of them are given in
the list.

Near Memphis, Tenn., six Negroes were lynched--this time charged with
burning barns. A trial of the indicted resulted in an acquittal, although
it was shown on trial that the lynching was prearranged for them. Six
widows and twenty-seven orphans are indebted to this mob for their
condition, and this lynching swells the number to eleven Negroes lynched
in and about Memphis since March 9, 1892.

In Brooks County, Ga., Dec. 23, while this Christian country was preparing
for Christmas celebration, seven Negroes were lynched in twenty-four hours
because they refused, or were unable to tell the whereabouts of a colored
man named Pike, who killed a white man. The wives and daughters of these
lynched men were horribly and brutally outraged by the murderers of their
husbands and fathers. But the mob has not been punished and again women
and children are robbed of their protectors whose blood cries unavenged to
Heaven and humanity. Georgia heads the list of lynching states.


MURDER

Jan. 9, Samuel Smith, Greenville, Ala., Jan. 11, Sherman Wagoner,
Mitchell, Ind.; Jan. 12, Roscoe Parker, West Union, Ohio; Feb. 7, Henry
Bruce, Gulch Co., Ark.; March 5, Sylvester Rhodes, Collins, Ga.; March 15,
Richard Puryea, Stroudsburg, Pa.; March 29, Oliver Jackson, Montgomery,
Ala.; March 30, ---- Saybrick, Fisher's Ferry, Miss.; April 14, William
Lewis, Lanison, Ala.; April 23, Jefferson Luggle, Cherokee, Kan.; April
23, Samuel Slaugate, Tallulah, La.; April 23, Thomas Claxton, Tallulah,
La.; April 23, David Hawkins, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Thel Claxton,
Tallulah, La.; April 27, Comp Claxton, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Scot
Harvey, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Jerry McCly, Tallulah, La.; May 17, Henry
Scott, Jefferson, Tex.; May 15, Coat Williams, Pine Grove, Fla.; June 2,
Jefferson Crawford, Bethesda, S.C.; June 4, Thondo Underwood, Monroe, La.;
June 8, Isaac Kemp, Cape Charles, Va.; June 13, Lon Hall, Sweethouse,
Tex.; June 13, Bascom Cook, Sweethouse, Tex.; June 15, Luke Thomas,
Biloxi, Miss.; June 29, John Williams, Sulphur, Tex.; June 29, Ulysses
Hayden, Monett, Mo.; July 6, ---- Hood, Amite, Miss.; July 7, James Bell,
Charlotte, Tenn.; Sept. 2, Henderson Hollander, Elkhorn, W. Va.; Sept. 14,
Robert Williams, Concordia Parish, La.; Sept. 22, Luke Washington, Meghee,
Ark.; Sept. 22, Richard Washington, Meghee, Ark.; Sept. 22, Henry
Crobyson, Meghee, Ark.; Nov. 10, Lawrence Younger, Lloyd, Va.; Dec. 17,
unknown Negro, Williamston, S.C.; Dec. 23, Samuel Taylor, Brooks County,
Ga.; Dec. 23, Charles Frazier, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23, Samuel Pike,
Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 22, Harry Sherard, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23,
unknown Negro, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23, unknown Negro, Brooks County,
Ga.; Dec. 23, unknown Negro, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 26, Daniel McDonald,
Winston County, Miss.; Dec. 23, William Carter, Winston County, Miss.


RAPE

Jan. 17, John Buckner, Valley Park, Mo.; Jan. 21, M.G. Cambell, Jellico
Mines, Ky.; Jan. 27, unknown, Verona, Mo.; Feb. 11, Henry McCreeg, near
Pioneer, Tenn.; April 6, Daniel Ahren, Greensboro, Ga.; April 15, Seymour
Newland, Rushsylvania, Ohio; April 26, Robert Evarts, Jamaica, Ga.; April
27, James Robinson, Manassas, Va.; April 27, Benjamin White, Manassas,
Va.; May 15, Nim Young, Ocala, Fla.; May 22, unknown, Miller County, Ga.;
June 13, unknown, Blackshear, Ga.; June 18, Owen Opliltree, Forsyth, Ga.;
June 22, Henry Capus, Magnolia, Ark.; June 26, Caleb Godly, Bowling Green,
Ky.; June 28, Fayette Franklin, Mitchell, Ga.; July 2, Joseph Johnson,
Hiller's Creek, Mo.; July 6, Lewis Bankhead, Cooper, Ala.; July 16, Marion
Howard, Scottsville, Ky.; July 20, William Griffith, Woodville, Tex.; Aug.
12, William Nershbread, Rossville, Tenn.; Aug. 14, Marshall Boston,
Frankfort, Ky; Sept. 19, David Gooseby, Atlanta, Ga.; Oct. 15, Willis
Griffey, Princeton, Ky; Nov. 8, Lee Lawrence, Jasper County, Ga.; Nov. 10,
Needham Smith, Tipton County, Tenn.; Nov. 14, Robert Mosely, Dolinite,
Ala.; Dec. 4, William Jackson, Ocala, Fla.; Dec. 18, unknown, Marion
County, Fla.


UNKNOWN OFFENSES

March 6, Lamsen Gregory, Bell's Depot, Tenn.; March 6, unknown woman, near
Marche, Ark.; April 14, Alfred Brenn, Calhoun, Ga.; June 8, Harry Gill,
West Lancaster, S.C.; Nov. 23, unknown, Landrum, S.C.; Dec. 5, Mrs. Teddy
Arthur, Lincoln County, W. Va.


DESPERADO

Jan. 14, Charles Willis, Ocala, Fla.


SUSPECTED INCENDIARISM

Jan. 18, unknown, Bayou Sarah, La.


SUSPECTED ARSON

June 14, J.H. Dave, Monroe, La.


ENTICING SERVANT AWAY

Feb. 10, ---- Collins, Athens, Ga.


TRAIN WRECKING

Feb. 10, Jesse Dillingham, Smokeyville, Tex.


HIGHWAY ROBBERY

June 3, unknown, Dublin, Ga.


INCENDIARISM

Nov. 8, Gabe Nalls, Blackford, Ky.; Nov. 8, Ulysses Nails, Blackford, Ky.


ARSON

Dec. 20, James Allen, Brownsville, Tex.


ASSAULT

Dec. 23, George King, New Orleans, La.


NO OFFENSE

Dec. 28, Scott Sherman, Morehouse Parish, La.


BURGLARY

May 29, Henry Smith, Clinton, Miss.; May 29, William James, Clinton,
Miss.


ALLEGED RAPE

June 4, Ready Murdock, Yazoo, Miss.


ATTEMPTED RAPE

July 14, unknown Negro, Biloxi, Miss.; July 26, Vance McClure, New Iberia,
La.; July 26, William Tyler, Carlisle, Ky.; Sept. 14, James Smith, Stark,
Fla.; Oct. 8, Henry Gibson, Fairfield, Tex.; Oct. 20, ---- Williams, Upper
Marlboro, Md.; June 9, Lewis Williams, Hewett Springs, Miss.; June 28,
George Linton, Brookhaven, Miss.; June 28, Edward White, Hudson, Ala.;
July 6, George Pond, Fulton, Miss.; July 7, Augustus Pond, Tupelo, Miss.


RACE PREJUDICE

June 10, Mark Jacobs, Bienville, La.; July 24, unknown woman, Sampson
County, Miss.


INTRODUCING SMALLPOX

June 10, James Perry, Knoxville, Ark.


KIDNAPPING

March 2, Lentige, Harland County, Ky.


CONSPIRACY

May 29, J.T. Burgis, Palatka, Fla.


HORSE STEALING

June 20, Archie Haynes, Mason County, Ky.; June 20, Burt Haynes, Mason
County, Ky.; June 20, William Haynes, Mason County, Ky.


WRITING LETTER TO WHITE WOMAN

May 9, unknown Negro, West Texas.


GIVING INFORMATION

July 12, James Nelson, Abbeyville, S.C.


STEALING

Jan. 5, Alfred Davis, Live Oak County, Ark.


LARCENY

April 18, Henry Montgomery, Lewisburg, Tenn.


POLITICAL CAUSES

July 19, John Brownlee, Oxford, Ala.


CONJURING

July 20, Allen Myers, Rankin County, Miss.


ATTEMPTED MURDER

June 1, Frank Ballard, Jackson, Tenn.


ALLEGED MURDER

April 5, Negro, near Selma, Ala.; April 5, Negro, near Selma, Ala.


WITHOUT CAUSE

May 17, Samuel Wood, Gates City, Va.


BARN BURNING

April 22, Thomas Black, Tuscumbia, Ala.; April 22, John Williams,
Tuscumbia, Ala.; April 22, Toney Johnson, Tuscumbia, Ala.; July 14,
William Bell, Dixon, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Daniel Hawkins, Millington, Tenn.;
Sept. 1, Robert Haynes, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Warner Williams,
Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Edward Hall, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, John
Haynes, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Graham White, Millington, Tenn.


ASKING WHITE WOMAN TO MARRY HIM

May 23, William Brooks, Galesline, Ark.


OFFENSES CHARGED FOR LYNCHING

Suspected arson, 2; stealing, 1; political causes, 1; murder, 45; rape,
29; desperado, 1; suspected incendiarism, 1; train wrecking, 1; enticing
servant away, 1; kidnapping, 1; unknown offense, 6; larceny, 1; barn
burning, 10; writing letters to a white woman, 1; without cause, 1;
burglary, 1; asking white woman to marry, 1; conspiracy, 1; attempted
murder, 1; horse stealing, 3; highway robbery, 1; alleged rape, 1;
attempted rape, 11; race prejudice, 2; introducing smallpox, 1; giving
information, 1; conjuring, 1; incendiarism, 2; arson, 1; assault, 1; no
offense, 1; alleged murder, 2; total (colored), 134.


LYNCHING STATES

Mississippi, 15; Arkansas, 8; Virginia, 5; Tennessee, 15; Alabama, 12;
Kentucky, 12; Texas, 9; Georgia, 19; South Carolina, 5; Florida, 7;
Louisiana, 15; Missouri, 4; Ohio, 2; Maryland, 1; West Virginia, 2;
Indiana, 1; Kansas, 1; Pennsylvania, 1.


LYNCHING BY THE MONTH

January, 11; February, 17; March, 8; April, 36; May, 16; June, 31; July,
21; August, 4; September, 17; October, 7; November, 9; December, 20; total
colored and white, 197.


WOMEN LYNCHED

July 24, unknown woman, race prejudice, Sampson County, Miss.; March 6,
unknown, woman, unknown offense, Marche, Ark.; Dec. 5, Mrs. Teddy Arthur,
unknown cause, Lincoln County, W. Va.




10

THE REMEDY


It is a well-established principle of law that every wrong has a remedy.
Herein rests our respect for law. The Negro does not claim that all of the
one thousand black men, women and children, who have been hanged, shot and
burned alive during the past ten years, were innocent of the charges made
against them. We have associated too long with the white man not to have
copied his vices as well as his virtues. But we do insist that the
punishment is not the same for both classes of criminals. In lynching,
opportunity is not given the Negro to defend himself against the
unsupported accusations of white men and women. The word of the accuser is
held to be true and the excited bloodthirsty mob demands that the rule of
law be reversed and instead of proving the accused to be guilty, the
victim of their hate and revenge must prove himself innocent. No evidence
he can offer will satisfy the mob; he is bound hand and foot and swung
into eternity. Then to excuse its infamy, the mob almost invariably
reports the monstrous falsehood that its victim made a full confession
before he was hanged.

With all military, legal and political power in their hands, only two of
the lynching States have attempted a check by exercising the power which
is theirs. Mayor Trout, of Roanoke, Virginia, called out the militia in
1893, to protect a Negro prisoner, and in so doing nine men were killed
and a number wounded. Then the mayor and militia withdrew, left the Negro
to his fate and he was promptly lynched. The business men realized the
blow to the town's were given light sentences, the highest being one of
twelve financial interests, called the mayor home, the grand jury
indicted and prosecuted the ringleaders of the mob. They months in State
prison. The day he arrived at the penitentiary, he was pardoned by the
governor of the State.

The only other real attempt made by the authorities to protect a prisoner
of the law, and which was more successful, was that of Gov. McKinley, of
Ohio, who sent the militia to Washington Courthouse, O., in October, 1894,
and five men were killed and twenty wounded in maintaining the principle
that the law must be upheld.

In South Carolina, in April, 1893, Gov. Tillman aided the mob by yielding
up to be killed, a prisoner of the law, who had voluntarily placed himself
under the Governor's protection. Public sentiment by its representatives
has encouraged Lynch Law, and upon the revolution of this sentiment we
must depend for its abolition.

Therefore, we demand a fair trial by law for those accused of crime, and
punishment by law after honest conviction. No maudlin sympathy for
criminals is solicited, but we do ask that the law shall punish all alike.
We earnestly desire those that control the forces which make public
sentiment to join with us in the demand. Surely the humanitarian spirit of
this country which reaches out to denounce the treatment of the Russian
Jews, the Armenian Christians, the laboring poor of Europe, the Siberian
exiles and the native women of India--will not longer refuse to lift its
voice on this subject. If it were known that the cannibals or the savage
Indians had burned three human beings alive in the past two years, the
whole of Christendom would be roused, to devise ways and means to put a
stop to it. Can you remain silent and inactive when such things are done
in our own community and country? Is your duty to humanity in the United
States less binding?

What can you do, reader, to prevent lynching, to thwart anarchy and
promote law and order throughout our land?

1st. You can help disseminate the facts contained in this book by bringing
them to the knowledge of every one with whom you come in contact, to the
end that public sentiment may be revolutionized. Let the facts speak for
themselves, with you as a medium.

2d. You can be instrumental in having churches, missionary societies,
Y.M.C.A.'s, W.C.T.U.'s and all Christian and moral forces in connection
with your religious and social life, pass resolutions of condemnation and
protest every time a lynching takes place; and see that they axe sent to
the place where these outrages occur.

3d. Bring to the intelligent consideration of Southern people the refusal
of capital to invest where lawlessness and mob violence hold sway. Many
labor organizations have declared by resolution that they would avoid
lynch infested localities as they would the pestilence when seeking new
homes. If the South wishes to build up its waste places quickly, there is
no better way than to uphold the majesty of the law by enforcing obedience
to the same, and meting out the same punishment to all classes of
criminals, white as well as black. "Equality before the law," must become
a fact as well as a theory before America is truly the "land of the free
and the home of the brave."

4th. Think and act on independent lines in this behalf, remembering that
after all, it is the white man's civilization and the white man's
government which are on trial. This crusade will determine whether that
civilization can maintain itself by itself, or whether anarchy shall
prevail; Whether this Nation shall write itself down a success at self
government, or in deepest humiliation admit its failure complete; whether
the precepts and theories of Christianity are professed and practiced by
American white people as Golden Rules of thought and action, or adopted as
a system of morals to be preached to, heathen until they attain to the
intelligence which needs the system of Lynch Law.

5th. Congressman Blair offered a resolution in the House of
Representatives, August, 1894. The organized life of the country can
speedily make this a law by sending resolutions to Congress indorsing Mr.
Blair's bill and asking Congress to create the commission. In no better
way can the question be settled, and the Negro does not fear the issue.
The following is the resolution:

  Resolved, By the House of Representatives and Senate in congress
  assembled, That the committee on labor be instructed to investigate and
  report the number, location and date of all alleged assaults by males
  upon females throughout the country during the ten years last preceding
  the passing of this joint resolution, for or on account of which
  organized but unlawful violence has been inflicted or attempted to be
  inflicted. Also to ascertain and report all facts of organized but
  unlawful violence to the person, with the attendant facts and
  circumstances, which have been inflicted upon accused persons alleged to
  have been guilty of crimes punishable by due process of law which have
  taken place in any part of the country within the ten years last
  preceding the passage of this resolution. Such investigation shall be
  made by the usual methods and agencies of the Department of Labor, and
  report made to Congress as soon as the work can be satisfactorily done,
  and the sum of $25,000, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is
  hereby appropriated to pay the expenses out of any money in the treasury
  not otherwise appropriated.

The belief has been constantly expressed in England that in the United
States, which has produced Wm. Lloyd Garrison, Henry Ward Beecher, James
Russell Lowell, John G. Whittier and Abraham Lincoln there must be those
of their descendants who would take hold of the work of inaugurating an
era of law and order. The colored people of this country who have been
loyal to the flag believe the same, and strong in that belief have begun
this crusade. To those who still feel they have no obligation in the
matter, we commend the following lines of Lowell on "Freedom."

    Men! whose boast it is that ye
    Come of fathers brave and free,
    If there breathe on earth a slave
    Are ye truly free and brave?
    If ye do not feel the chain,
    When it works a brother's pain,
    Are ye not base slaves indeed,
    Slaves unworthy to be freed?

    Women! who shall one day bear
    Sons to breathe New England air,
    If ye hear without a blush,
    Deeds to make the roused blood rush
    Like red lava through your veins,
    For your sisters now in chains,--
    Answer! are ye fit to be
    Mothers of the brave and free?

    Is true freedom but to break
    Fetters for our own dear sake,
    And, with leathern hearts, forget
    That we owe mankind a debt?
    No! true freedom is to share
    All the chains our brothers wear,
    And, with heart and hand, to be
    Earnest to make others free!

    There are slaves who fear to speak
    For the fallen and the weak;
    They are slaves who will not choose
    Hatred, scoffing, and abuse,
    Rather than in silence shrink
    From the truth they needs must think;
    They are slaves who dare not be
    In the right with two or three.


A FIELD FOR PRACTICAL WORK

The very frequent inquiry made after my lectures by interested friends is
"What can I do to help the cause?" The answer always is: "Tell the world
the facts." When the Christian world knows the alarming growth and extent
of outlawry in our land, some means will be found to stop it.

The object of this publication is to tell the facts, and friends of the
cause can lend a helping hand by aiding in the distribution of these
books. When I present our cause to a minister, editor, lecturer, or
representative of any moral agency, the first demand is for facts and
figures. Plainly, I can not then hand out a book with a twenty-five-cent
tariff on the information contained. This would be only a new method in
the book agents' art. In all such cases it is a pleasure to submit this
book for investigation, with the certain assurance of gaining a friend to
the cause.

There are many agencies which may be enlisted in our cause by the general
circulation of the facts herein contained. The preachers, teachers,
editors and humanitarians of the white race, at home and abroad, must have
facts laid before them, and it is our duty to supply these facts. The
Central Anti-Lynching League, Room 9, 128 Clark St., Chicago, has
established a Free Distribution Fund, the work of which can be promoted by
all who are interested in this work.

Antilynching leagues, societies and individuals can order books from this
fund at agents' rates. The books will be sent to their order, or, if
desired, will be distributed by the League among those whose cooperative
aid we so greatly need. The writer hereof assures prompt distribution of
books according to order, and public acknowledgment of all orders through
the public press.



+INTRODUCTION+

Immediately after the awful barbarism which disgraced the State of Georgia
in April of last year, during which time more than a dozen colored people
were put to death with unspeakable barbarity, I published a full report
showing that Sam Hose, who was burned to death during that time, never
committed a criminal assault, and that he killed his employer in
self-defense.

Since that time I have been engaged on a work not yet finished, which I
interrupt now to tell the story of the mob in New Orleans, which,
despising all law, roamed the streets day and night, searching for colored
men and women, whom they beat, shot and killed at will.

In the account of the New Orleans mob I have used freely the graphic
reports of the _New Orleans Times-Democrat_ and the _New Orleans
Picayune_. Both papers gave the most minute details of the week's
disorder. In their editorial comment they were at all times most urgent in
their defense of law and in the strongest terms they condemned the
infamous work of the mob.

It is no doubt owing to the determined stand for law and order taken by
these great dailies and the courageous action taken by the best citizens
of New Orleans, who rallied to the support of the civic authorities, that
prevented a massacre of colored people awful to contemplate.

For the accounts and illustrations taken from the above-named journals,
sincere thanks are hereby expressed.

[Illustration]

The publisher hereof does not attempt to moralize over the deplorable
condition of affairs shown in this publication, but simply presents the
facts in a plain, unvarnished, connected way, so that he who runs may
read. We do not believe that the American people who have encouraged such
scenes by their indifference will read unmoved these accounts of
brutality, injustice and oppression. We do not believe that the moral
conscience of the nation--that which is highest and best among us--will
always remain silent in face of such outrages, for God is not dead, and
His Spirit is not entirely driven from men's hearts.

When this conscience wakes and speaks out in thunder tones, as it must, it
will need facts to use as a weapon against injustice, barbarism and wrong.
It is for this reason that I carefully compile, print and send forth these
facts. If the reader can do no more, he can pass this pamphlet on to
another, or send to the bureau addresses of those to whom he can order
copies mailed.

Besides the New Orleans case, a history of burnings in this country is
given, together with a table of lynchings for the past eighteen years.
Those who would like to assist in the work of disseminating these facts,
can do so by ordering copies, which are furnished at greatly reduced
rates for gratuitous distribution. The bureau has no funds and is entirely
dependent upon contributions from friends and members in carrying on the
work.

Ida B. Wells-Barnett
Chicago, Sept. 1, 1900




MOB RULE IN NEW ORLEANS





+SHOT AN OFFICER+

The bloodiest week which New Orleans has known since the massacre of the
Italians in 1892 was ushered in Monday, July 24, by the inexcusable and
unprovoked assault upon two colored men by police officers of New Orleans.
Fortified by the assurance born of long experience in the New Orleans
service, three policemen, Sergeant Aucoin, Officer Mora and Officer
Cantrelle, observing two colored men sitting on doorsteps on Dryades
street, between Washington Avenue and 6th Streets, determined, without a
shadow of authority, to arrest them. One of the colored men was named
Robert Charles, the other was a lad of nineteen named Leonard Pierce. The
colored men had left their homes, a few blocks distant, about an hour
prior, and had been sitting upon the doorsteps for a short time talking
together. They had not broken the peace in any way whatever, no warrant
was in the policemen's hands justifying their arrest, and no crime had
been committed of which they were the suspects. The policemen, however,
secure in the firm belief that they could do anything to a Negro that they
wished, approached the two men, and in less than three minutes from the
time they accosted them attempted to put both colored men under arrest.
The younger of the two men, Pierce, submitted to arrest, for the officer,
Cantrelle, who accosted him, put his gun in the young man's face ready to
blow his brains out if he moved. The other colored man, Charles, was made
the victim of a savage attack by Officer Mora, who used a billet and then
drew a gun and tried to kill Charles. Charles drew his gun nearly as
quickly as the policeman, and began a duel in the street, in which both
participants were shot. The policeman got the worst of the duel, and fell
helpless to the sidewalk. Charles made his escape. Cantrelle took Pierce,
his captive, to the police station, to which place Mora, the wounded
officer, was also taken, and a man hunt at once instituted for Charles,
the wounded fugitive.

In any law-abiding community Charles would have been justified in
delivering himself up immediately to the properly constituted authorities
and asking a trial by a jury of his peers. He could have been certain that
in resisting an unwarranted arrest he had a right to defend his life, even
to the point of taking one in that defense, but Charles knew that his
arrest in New Orleans, even for defending his life, meant nothing short of
a long term in the penitentiary, and still more probable death by lynching
at the hands of a cowardly mob. He very bravely determined to protect his
life as long as he had breath in his body and strength to draw a hair
trigger on his would-be murderers. How well he was justified in that
belief is well shown by the newspaper accounts which were given of this
transaction. Without a single line of evidence to justify the assertion,
the New Orleans daily papers at once declared that both Pierce and Charles
were desperadoes, that they were contemplating a burglary and that they
began the assault upon the policemen. It is interesting to note how the
two leading papers of New Orleans, the _Picayune_ and the
_Times-Democrat_, exert themselves to justify the policemen in the
absolutely unprovoked attack upon the two colored men. As these two papers
did all in their power to give an excuse for the action of the policemen,
it is interesting to note their versions. The _Times-Democrat_ of Tuesday
morning, the twenty-fifth, says:

  Two blacks, who are desperate men, and no doubt will be proven burglars,
  made it interesting and dangerous for three bluecoats on Dryades street,
  between Washington Avenue and Sixth Street, the Negroes using pistols
  first and dropping Patrolman Mora. But the desperate darkies did not go
  free, for the taller of the two, Robinson, is badly wounded and under
  cover, while Leonard Pierce is in jail.

  For a long time that particular neighborhood has been troubled with bad
  Negroes, and the neighbors were complaining to the Sixth Precinct police
  about them. But of late Pierce and Robinson had been camping on a door
  step on the street, and the people regarded their actions as suspicious.
  It got to such a point that some of the residents were afraid to go to
  bed, and last night this was told Sergeant Aucoin, who was rounding up
  his men. He had just picked up Officers Mora and Cantrell, on Washington
  Avenue and Dryades Street, and catching a glimpse of the blacks on the
  steps, he said he would go over and warn the men to get away from the
  street. So the patrolmen followed, and Sergeant Aucoin asked the smaller
  fellow, Pierce, if he lived there. The answer was short and impertinent,
  the black saying he did not, and with that both Pierce and Robinson drew
  up to their full height.

  For the moment the sergeant did not think that the Negroes meant fight,
  and he was on the point of ordering them away when Robinson slipped his
  pistol from his pocket. Pierce had his revolver out, too, and he fired
  twice, point blank at the sergeant, and just then Robinson began
  shooting at the patrolmen. In a second or so the policemen and blacks
  were fighting with their revolvers, the sergeant having a duel with
  Pierce, while Cantrell and Mora drew their line of fire on Robinson, who
  was working his revolver for all he was worth. One of his shots took
  Mora in the right hip, another caught his index finger on the right
  hand, and a third struck the small finger of the left hand. Poor Mora
  was done for; he could not fight any more, but Cantrell kept up his
  fire, being answered by the big black. Pierce's revolver broke down, the
  cartridges snapping, and he threw up his hands, begging for quarter.

  The sergeant lowered his pistol and some citizens ran over to where the
  shooting was going on. One of the bullets that went at Robinson caught
  him in the breast and he began running, turning out Sixth Street, with
  Cantrell behind him, shooting every few steps. He was loading his
  revolver again, but did not use it after the start he took, and in a
  little while Officer Cantrell lost the man in the darkness.

  Pierce was made a prisoner and hurried to the Sixth Precinct police
  station, where he was charged with shooting and wounding. The sergeant
  sent for an ambulance, and Mora was taken to the hospital, the wound in
  the hip being serious.

  A search was made for Robinson, but he could not be found, and even at 2
  o'clock this morning Captain Day, with Sergeant Aucoin and Corporals
  Perrier and Trenchard, with a good squad of men, were beating the weeds
  for the black.

The _New Orleans Picayune_ of the same date described the occurrence, and
from its account one would think it was an entirely different affair. Both
of the two accounts cannot be true, and the unquestioned fact is that
neither of them sets out the facts as they occurred. Both accounts attempt
to fix the beginning of hostilities upon the colored men, but both were
compelled to admit that the colored men were sitting on the doorsteps
quietly conversing with one another when the three policemen went up and
accosted them. The _Times-Democrat_ unguardedly states that one of the two
colored men tried to run away; that Mora seized him and then drew his
billy and struck him on the head; that Charles broke away from him and
started to run, after which the shooting began. The _Picayune_, however,
declares that Pierce began the firing and that his two shots point blank
at Aucoin were the first shots of the fight. As a matter of fact, Pierce
never fired a single shot before he was covered by Aucoin's revolver.
Charles and the officers did all the shooting. The _Picayune_'s account is
as follows:

  Patrolman Mora was shot in the right hip and dangerously wounded last
  night at 11:30 o'clock in Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth,
  by two Negroes, who were sitting on a door step in the neighborhood.

  The shooting of Patrolman Mora brings to memory the fact that he was one
  of the partners of Patrolman Trimp, who was shot by a Negro soldier of
  the United States government during the progress of the Spanish-American
  war. The shooting of Mora by the Negro last night is a very simple
  story. At the hour mentioned, three Negro women noticed two suspicious
  men sitting on a door step in the above locality. The women saw the two
  men making an apparent inspection of the building. As they told the
  story, they saw the men look over the fence and examine the window
  blinds, and they paid particular attention to the make-up of the
  building, which was a two-story affair. About that time Sergeant J.C.
  Aucoin and Officers Mora and J.D. Cantrell hove in sight. The women
  hailed them and described to them the suspicious actions of the two
  Negroes, who were still sitting on the step. The trio of bluecoats, on
  hearing the facts, at once crossed the street and accosted the men. The
  latter answered that they were waiting for a friend whom they were
  expecting. Not satisfied with this answer, the sergeant asked them where
  they lived, and they replied "down town," but could not designate the
  locality. To other questions put by the officers the larger of the two
  Negroes replied that they had been in town just three days.

  As this reply was made, the larger man sprang to his feet, and Patrolman
  Mora, seeing that he was about to run away, seized him. The Negro took a
  firm hold on the officer, and a scuffle ensued. Mora, noting that he was
  not being assisted by his brother officers, drew his billy and struck
  the Negro on the head. The blow had but little effect upon the man, for
  he broke away and started down the street. When about ten feet away, the
  Negro drew his revolver and opened fire on the officer, firing three or
  four shots. The third shot struck Mora in the right hip, and was
  subsequently found to have taken an upward course. Although badly
  wounded, Mora drew his pistol and returned the fire. At his third shot
  the Negro was noticed to stagger, but he did not fall. He continued his
  flight. At this moment Sergeant Aucoin seized the other Negro, who
  proved to be a youth, Leon Pierce. As soon as Officer Mora was shot he
  sank to the sidewalk, and the other officer ran to the nearest
  telephone, and sent in a call for the ambulance. Upon its arrival the
  wounded officer was placed in it and conveyed to the hospital. An
  examination by the house surgeon revealed the fact that the bullet had
  taken an upward course. In the opinion of the surgeon the wound was a
  dangerous one.

But the best proof of the fact that the officers accosted the two colored
men and without any warrant or other justification attempted to arrest
them, and did actually seize and begin to club one of them, is shown by
Officer Mora's own statement. The officer was wounded and had every reason
in the world to make his side of the story as good as possible. His
statement was made to a _Picayune_ reporter and the same was published on
the twenty-fifth inst., and is as follows:

  I was in the neighborhood of Dryades and Washington Streets, with
  Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Cantrell, when three Negro women came up and
  told us that there were two suspicious-looking Negroes sitting on a step
  on Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth. We went to the place
  indicated and found two Negroes. We interrogated them as to who they
  were, what they were doing and how long they had been here. They replied
  that they were working for some one and had been in town three days. At
  about this stage the larger of the two Negroes got up and I grabbed him.
  The Negro pulled, but I held fast, and he finally pulled me into the
  street. Here I began using my billet, and the Negro jerked from my grasp
  and ran. He then pulled a gun and fired. I pulled my gun and returned
  the fire, each of us firing about three shots. I saw the Negro stumble
  several times, and I thought I had shot him, but he ran away and I don't
  know whether any of my shots took effect. Sergeant Aucoin in the
  meantime held the other man fast. The man was about ten feet from me
  when he fired, and the three Negresses who told us about the men stood
  away about twenty-five feet from the shooting.

Thus far in the proceeding the Monday night episode results in Officer
Mora lying in the station wounded in the hip; Leonard Pierce, one of the
colored men, locked up in the station, and Robert Charles, the other
colored man, a fugitive, wounded in the leg and sought for by the entire
police force of New Orleans. Not sought for, however, to be placed under
arrest and given a fair trial and punished if found guilty according to
the law of the land, but sought for by a host of enraged, vindictive and
fearless officers, who were coolly ordered to kill him on sight. This
order is shown by the _Picayune_ of the twenty-sixth inst., in which the
following statement appears:

  In talking to the sergeant about the case, the captain asked about the
  Negro's fighting ability, and the sergeant answered that Charles, though
  he called him Robinson then, was a desperate man, and it would be best
  to shoot him before he was given a chance to draw his pistol upon any of
  the officers.

This instruction was given before anybody had been killed, and the only
evidence that Charles was a desperate man lay in the fact that he had
refused to be beaten over the head by Officer Mora for sitting on a step
quietly conversing with a friend. Charles resisted an absolutely unlawful
attack, and a gun fight followed. Both Mora and Charles were shot, but
because Mora was white and Charles was black, Charles was at once declared
to be a desperado, made an outlaw, and subsequently a price put upon his
head and the mob authorized to shoot him like a dog, on sight.

The New Orleans _Picayune_ of Wednesday morning said:

  But he has gone, perhaps to the swamps, and the disappointment of the
  bluecoats in not getting the murderer is expressed in their curses, each
  man swearing that the signal to halt that will be offered Charles will
  be a shot.

In that same column of the _Picayune_ it was said:

  Hundreds of policemen were about; each corner was guarded by a squad,
  commanded either by a sergeant or a corporal, and every man had the word
  to shoot the Negro as soon as he was sighted. He was a desperate black
  and would be given no chance to take more life.

Legal sanction was given to the mob or any man of the mob to kill Charles
at sight by the Mayor of New Orleans, who publicly proclaimed a reward of
two hundred and fifty dollars, not for the arrest of Charles, not at all,
but the reward was offered for Charles's body, "dead or alive." The
advertisement was as follows:

  +$250 REWARD+

  Under the authority vested in me by law, I hereby offer, in the name of
  the city of New Orleans, $250 reward for the capture and delivery, dead
  or alive, to the authorities of the city, the body of the Negro
  murderer,

  +ROBERT CHARLES+,

  who, on Tuesday morning, July 24, shot and killed

  Police Captain John T. Day and Patrolman Peter J. Lamb, and wounded

  Patrolman August T. Mora.

  PAUL CAPDEVIELLE, Mayor

This authority, given by the sergeant to kill Charles on sight, would have
been no news to Charles, nor to any colored man in New Orleans, who, for
any purpose whatever, even to save his life, raised his hand against a
white man. It is now, even as it was in the days of slavery, an
unpardonable sin for a Negro to resist a white man, no matter how unjust
or unprovoked the white man's attack may be. Charles knew this, and
knowing to be captured meant to be killed, he resolved to sell his life as
dearly as possible.

The next step in the terrible tragedy occurred between 2:30 and 5 o'clock
Tuesday morning, about four hours after the affair on Dryades Street. The
man hunt, which had been inaugurated soon after Officer Mora had been
carried to the station, succeeded in running down Robert Charles, the
wounded fugitive, and located him at 2023 4th Street. It was nearly 2
o'clock in the morning when a large detail of police surrounded the block
with the intent to kill Charles on sight. Capt. Day had charge of the
squad of police. Charles, the wounded man, was in his house when the
police arrived, fully prepared, as results afterward showed, to die in his
own home. Capt. Day started for Charles's room. As soon as Charles got
sight of him there was a flash, a report, and Day fell dead in his tracks.
In another instant Charles was standing in the door, and seeing Patrolman
Peter J. Lamb, he drew his gun, and Lamb fell dead. Two other officers,
Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Trenchard, who were in the squad, seeing their
comrades, Day and Lamb, fall dead, concluded to raise the siege, and both
disappeared into an adjoining house, where they blew out their lights so
that their cowardly carcasses could be safe from Charles's deadly aim. The
calibre of their courage is well shown by the fact that they concluded to
save themselves from any harm by remaining prisoners in that dark room
until daybreak, out of reach of Charles's deadly rifle. Sergeant Aucoin,
who had been so brave a few hours before when seeing the two colored men
sitting on the steps, talking together on Dryades Street, and supposing
that neither was armed, now showed his true calibre. Now he knew that
Charles had a gun and was brave enough to use it, so he hid himself in a
room two hours while Charles deliberately walked out of his room and into
the street after killing both Lamb and Day. It is also shown, as further
evidence of the bravery of some of New Orleans' "finest," that one of
them, seeing Capt. Day fall, ran seven blocks before he stopped,
afterwards giving the excuse that he was hunting for a patrol box.

At daybreak the officers felt safe to renew the attack upon Charles, so
they broke into his room, only to find that--what they probably very well
knew--he had gone. It appears that he made his escape by crawling through
a hole in the ceiling to a little attic in his house. Here he found that
he could not escape except by a window which led into an alley, which had
no opening on 4th Street. He scaled the fence and was soon out of reach.

It was now 5 o'clock Tuesday morning, and a general alarm was given.
Sergeant Aucoin and Corporal Trenchard, having received a new supply of
courage by returning daylight, renewed their effort to capture the man
that they had allowed to escape in the darkness. Citizens were called upon
to participate in the man hunt and New Orleans was soon the scene of
terrible excitement. Officers were present everywhere, and colored men
were arrested on all sides upon the pretext that they were impertinent and
"game niggers." An instance is mentioned in the _Times-Democrat_ of the
twenty-fifth and shows the treatment which unoffending colored men
received at the hands of some of the officers. This instance shows
Corporal Trenchard, who displayed such remarkable bravery on Monday night
in dodging Charles's revolver, in his true light. It shows how brave a
white man is when he has a gun attacking a Negro who is a helpless
prisoner. The account is as follows:

  The police made some arrests in the neighborhood of the killing of the
  two officers. Mobs of young darkies gathered everywhere. These Negroes
  talked and joked about the affair, and many of them were for starting a
  race war on the spot. It was not until several of these little gangs
  amalgamated and started demonstrations that the police commenced to
  act. Nearly a dozen arrests were made within an hour, and everybody in
  the vicinity was in a tremor of excitement.

  It was about 1 o'clock that the Negroes on Fourth Street became very
  noisy, and George Meyers, who lives on Sixth Street, near Rampart,
  appeared to be one of the prime movers in a little riot that was rapidly
  developing. Policeman Exnicios and Sheridan placed him under arrest, and
  owing to the fact that the patrol wagon had just left with a number of
  prisoners, they walked him toward St. Charles Avenue in order to get a
  conveyance to take him to the Sixth Precinct station.

  A huge crowd of Negroes followed the officers and their prisoners.
  Between Dryades and Baronne, on Sixth, Corporal Trenchard met the trio.
  He had his pistol in his hand and he came on them running. The Negroes
  in the wake of the officers, and prisoner took to flight immediately.
  Some disappeared through gates and some over fences and into yards, for
  Trenchard, visibly excited, was waving his revolver in the air and was
  threatening to shoot. He joined the officers in their walk toward St.
  Charles Street, and the way he acted led the white people who were
  witnessing the affair to believe that his prisoner was the wanted Negro.
  At every step he would punch him or hit him with the barrel of his
  pistol, and the onlookers cried, "Lynch him!" "Kill him!" and other
  expressions until the spectators were thoroughly wrought up. At St.
  Charles Street Trenchard desisted, and, calling an empty ice wagon,
  threw the Negro into the body of the vehicle and ordered Officer
  Exnicios to take him to the Sixth Precinct station.

  The ride to the station was a wild one. Exnicios had all he could do to
  watch his prisoner. A gang climbed into the wagon and administered a
  terrible thrashing to the black en route. It took a half hour to reach
  the police station, for the mule that was drawing the wagon was not
  overly fast. When the station was reached a mob of nearly 200 howling
  white youths was awaiting it. The noise they made was something
  terrible. Meyers was howling for mercy before he reached the ground. The
  mob dragged him from the wagon, the officer with him. Then began a
  torrent of abuse for the unfortunate prisoner.

  The station door was but thirty feet away, but it took Exnicios nearly
  five minutes to fight his way through the mob to the door. There were no
  other officers present, and the station seemed to be deserted. Neither
  the doorman nor the clerk paid any attention to the noise on the
  outside. As the result, the maddened crowd wrought their vengeance on
  the Negro. He was punched, kicked, bruised and torn. The clothes were
  ripped from his back, while his face after that few minutes was
  unrecognizable.

This was the treatment accorded and permitted to a helpless prisoner
because he was black. All day Wednesday the man hunt continued. The
excitement caused by the deaths of Day and Lamb became intense. The
officers of the law knew they were trailing a man whose aim was deadly and
whose courage they had never seen surpassed. Commenting upon the
marksmanship of the man which the paper styled a fiend, the
_Times-Democrat_ of Wednesday said:

  One of the extraordinary features of the tragedy was the marksmanship
  displayed by the Negro desperado. His aim was deadly and his coolness
  must have been something phenomenal. The two shots that killed Captain
  Day and Patrolman Lamb struck their victims in the head, a circumstance
  remarkable enough in itself, considering the suddenness and fury of the
  onslaught and the darkness that reigned in the alley way.

  Later on Charles fired at Corporal Perrier, who was standing at least
  seventy-five yards away. The murderer appeared at the gate, took
  lightning aim along the side of the house, and sent a bullet whizzing
  past the officer's ear. It was a close shave, and a few inches'
  deflection would no doubt have added a fourth victim to the list.

  At the time of the affray there is good reason to believe that Charles
  was seriously wounded, and at any event he had lost quantities of blood.
  His situation was as critical as it is possible to imagine, yet he shot
  like an expert in a target range. The circumstance shows the desperate
  character of the fiend, and his terrible dexterity with weapons makes
  him one of the most formidable monsters that has ever been loose upon
  the community.

Wednesday New Orleans was in the hands of a mob. Charles, still sought for
and still defending himself, had killed four policemen, and everybody knew
that he intended to die fighting. Unable to vent its vindictiveness and
bloodthirsty vengeance upon Charles, the mob turned its attention to other
colored men who happened to get in the path of its fury. Even colored
women, as has happened many times before, were assaulted and beaten and
killed by the brutal hoodlums who thronged the streets. The reign of
absolute lawlessness began about 8 o'clock Wednesday night. The mob
gathered near the Lee statue and was soon making its way to the place
where the officers had been shot by Charles. Describing the mob, the
_Times-Democrat_ of Thursday morning says:

  The gathering in the square, which numbered about 700, eventually became
  in a measure quiet, and a large, lean individual, in poor attire and
  with unshaven face, leaped upon a box that had been brought for the
  purpose, and in a voice that under no circumstances could be heard at a
  very great distance, shouted: "Gentlemen, I am the Mayor of Kenner." He
  did not get a chance for some minutes to further declare himself, for
  the voice of the rabble swung over his like a huge wave over a sinking
  craft. He stood there, however, wildly waving his arms and demanded a
  hearing, which was given him when the uneasiness of the mob was quieted
  for a moment or so.

  "I am from Kenner, gentlemen, and I have come down to New Orleans
  tonight to assist you in teaching the blacks a lesson. I have killed a
  Negro before, and in revenge of the wrong wrought upon you and yours, I
  am willing to kill again. The only way that you can teach these Niggers
  a lesson and put them in their place is to go out and lynch a few of
  them as an object lesson. String up a few of them, and the others will
  trouble you no more. That is the only thing to do--kill them, string
  them up, lynch them! I will lead you, if you will but follow. On to the
  Parish Prison and lynch Pierce!"

  They bore down on the Parish Prison like an avalanche, but the avalanche
  split harmlessly on the blank walls of the jail, and Remy Klock sent out
  a brief message: "You can't have Pierce, and you can't get in." Up to
  that time the mob had had no opposition, but Klock's answer chilled them
  considerably. There was no deep-seated desperation in the crowd after
  all, only, that wild lawlessness which leads to deeds of cruelty, but
  not to stubborn battle. Around the corner from the prison is a row of
  pawn and second-hand shops, and to these the mob took like the ducks to
  the proverbial mill-pond, and the devastation they wrought upon Mr.
  Fink's establishment was beautiful in its line.

  Everything from breast pins to horse pistols went into the pockets of
  the crowd, and in the melee a man was shot down, while just around the
  corner somebody planted a long knife in the body of a little newsboy for
  no reason as yet shown. Every now and then a Negro would be flushed
  somewhere in the outskirts of the crowd and left beaten to a pulp. Just
  how many were roughly handled will never be known, but the unlucky
  thirteen had been severely beaten and maltreated up to a late hour, a
  number of those being in the Charity Hospital under the bandages and
  courtplaster of the doctors.

The first colored man to meet death at the hands of the mob was a
passenger on a street car. The mob had broken itself into fragments after
its disappointment at the jail, each fragment looking for a Negro to
kill. The bloodthirsty cruelty of one crowd is thus described by the
_Times-Democrat_:

  "We will get a Nigger down here, you bet!" was the yelling boast that
  went up from a thousand throats, and for the first time the march of the
  mob was directed toward the downtown sections. The words of the rioters
  were prophetic, for just as Canal Street was reached a car on the
  Villere line came along.

  "Stop that car!" cried half a hundred men. The advance guard, heeding
  the injunction, rushed up to the slowly moving car, and several, seizing
  the trolley, jerked it down.

  "Here's a Nigro!" said half a dozen men who sprang upon the car.

  The car was full of passengers at the time, among them several women.
  When the trolley was pulled down and the car thrown in total darkness,
  the latter began to scream, and for a moment or so it looked as if the
  life of every person in the car was in peril, for some of the crowd with
  demoniacal yells of "There he goes!" began to fire their weapons
  indiscriminately. The passengers in the car hastily jumped to the ground
  and joined the crowd, as it was evidently the safest place to be.

  "Where's that Nigger?" was the query passed along the line, and with
  that the search began in earnest. The Negro, after jumping off the car,
  lost himself for a few moments in the crowd, but after a brief search he
  was again located. The slight delay seemed, if possible, only to whet
  the desire of the bloodthirsty crowd, for the reappearance of the Negro
  was the signal for a chorus of screams and pistol shots directed at the
  fugitive. With the speed of a deer, the man ran straight from the corner
  of Canal and Villere to Customhouse Street. The pursuers, closely
  following, kept up a running fire, but notwithstanding the fact that
  they were right at the Negro's heels their aim was poor and their
  bullets went wide of the mark.

  The Negro, on reaching Customhouse Street, darted from the sidewalk out
  into the middle of the street. This was the worst maneuver that he could
  have made, as it brought him directly under the light from an arc lamp,
  located on a nearby corner. When the Negro came plainly in view of the
  foremost of the closely following mob they directed a volley at him.
  Half a dozen pistols flashed simultaneously, and one of the bullets
  evidently found its mark, for the Negro stopped short, threw up his
  hands, wavered for a moment, and then started to run again. This stop,
  slight as it was, proved fatal to the Negro's chances, for he had not
  gotten twenty steps farther when several of the men in advance of the
  others reached his side. A burly fellow, grabbing him with one hand,
  dealt him a terrible blow on the head with the other. The wounded man
  sank to the ground. The crowd pressed around him and began to beat him
  and stamp him. The men in the rear pressed forward and those beating the
  man were shoved forward. The half-dead Negro, when he was freed from his
  assailants, crawled over to the gutter. The men behind, however, stopped
  pushing when those in front yelled, "We've got him," and then it was
  that the attack on the bleeding Negro was resumed. A vicious kick
  directed at the Negro's head sent him into the gutter, and for a moment
  the body sank from view beneath the muddy, slimy water. "Pull him out;
  don't let him drown," was the cry, and instantly several of the men
  around the half-drowned Negro bent down and drew the body out. Twisting
  the body around they drew the head and shoulders up on the street, while
  from the waist down the Negro's body remained under the water. As soon
  as the crowd saw that the Negro was still alive they again began to beat
  and kick him. Every few moments they would stop and striking matches
  look into the man's face to see if he still lived. To better see if he
  was dead they would stick lighted matches to his eyes. Finally,
  believing he was dead they left him and started out to look for other
  Negroes. Just about this time some one yelled, "He ain't dead," and the
  men came back and renewed the attack. While the men were beating and
  pounding the prostrate form with stones and sticks a man in the crowd
  ran up, and crying, "I'll fix the d--- Negro," poked the muzzle of a
  pistol almost against the body and fired. This shot must have ended the
  man's life, for he lay like a stone, and realizing that they were
  wasting energy in further attacks, the men left their victim lying in
  the street.

The same paper, on the same day, July 26, describes the brutal butchery of
an aged colored man early in the morning:

  Baptiste Philo, a Negro, seventy-five years of age, was a victim of mob
  violence at Kerlerec and North Peters Streets about 2:30 o'clock this
  morning. The old man is employed about the French Market, and was on his
  way there when he was met by a crowd and desperately shot. The old man
  found his way to the Third Precinct police station, where it was found
  that he had received a ghastly wound in the abdomen. The ambulance was
  summoned and he was conveyed to the Charity Hospital. The students
  pronounced the wound fatal after a superficial examination.

Mob rule continued Thursday, its violence increasing every hour, until 2
p.m., when the climax seemed to be reached. The fact that colored men and
women had been made the victims of brutal mobs, chased through the
streets, killed upon the highways and butchered in their homes, did not
call the best element in New Orleans to active exertion in behalf of law
and order. The killing of a few Negroes more or less by irresponsible mobs
does not cut much figure in Louisiana. But when the reign of mob law
exerts a depressing influence upon the stock market and city securities
begin to show unsteady standing in money centers, then the strong arm of
the good white people of the South asserts itself and order is quickly
brought out of chaos.

It was so with New Orleans on that Thursday. The better element of the
white citizens began to realize that New Orleans in the hands of a mob
would not prove a promising investment for Eastern capital, so the better
element began to stir itself, not for the purpose of punishing the
brutality against the Negroes who had been beaten, or bringing to justice
the murderers of those who had been killed, but for the purpose of saving
the city's credit. The _Times-Democrat_, upon this phase of the situation
on Friday morning says:

  When it became known later in the day that State bonds had depreciated
  from a point to a point and a half on the New York market a new phase of
  seriousness was manifest to the business community. Thinking men
  realized that a continuance of unchecked disorder would strike a body
  blow to the credit of the city and in all probability would complicate
  the negotiation of the forthcoming improvement bonds. The bare thought
  that such a disaster might be brought about by a few irresponsible boys,
  tramps and ruffians, inflamed popular indignation to fever pitch. It was
  all that was needed to bring to the aid of the authorities the active
  personal cooperation of the entire better element.

With the financial credit of the city at stake, the good citizens rushed
to the rescue, and soon the Mayor was able to mobilize a posse of 1,000
willing men to assist the police in maintaining order, but rioting still
continued in different sections of the city. Colored men and women were
beaten, chased and shot whenever they made their appearance upon the
street. Late in the night a most despicable piece of villainy occurred on
Rousseau Street, where an aged colored woman was killed by the mob. The
_Times-Democrat_ thus describes, the murder:

  Hannah Mabry, an old Negress, was shot and desperately wounded shortly
  after midnight this morning while sleeping in her home at No. 1929
  Rousseau Street. It was the work of a mob, and was evidently well
  planned so far as escape was concerned, for the place was reached by
  police officers, and a squad of the volunteer police within a very short
  time after the reports of the shots, but not a prisoner was secured. The
  square was surrounded, but the mob had scattered in several directions,
  and, the darkness of the neighborhood aiding them, not one was taken.

  At the time the mob made the attack on the little house there were also
  in it David Mabry, the sixty-two-year-old husband of the wounded woman;
  her son, Harry Mabry; his wife, Fannie, and an infant child. The young
  couple with their babe could not be found after the whole affair was
  over, and they either escaped or were hustled off by the mob. A careful
  search of the whole neighborhood was made, but no trace of them could be
  found.

  The little place occupied by the Mabry family is an old cottage on the
  swamp side of Rousseau Street. It is furnished with slat shutters to
  both doors and windows. These shutters had been pulled off by the mob
  and the volleys fired through the glass doors. The younger Mabrys,
  father, mother and child, were asleep in the first room at the time.
  Hannah Mabry and her old husband were sleeping in the next room. The old
  couple occupied the same bed, and it is miraculous that the old man did
  not share the fate of his spouse.

  Officer Bitterwolf, who was one of the first on the scene, said that he
  was about a block and a half away with Officers Fordyce and Sweeney.
  There were about twenty shots fired, and the trio raced to the cottage.
  They saw twenty or thirty men running down Rousseau Street. Chase was
  given and the crowd turned toward the river and scattered into several
  vacant lots in the neighborhood.

  The volunteer police stationed at the Sixth Precinct had about five
  blocks to run before they arrived. They also moved on the reports of the
  firing, and in a remarkably short time the square was surrounded, but no
  one could be taken. As they ran to the scene they were assailed on every
  hand with vile epithets and the accusation of "Nigger lovers."

  Rousseau Street, where the cottage is situated, is a particularly dark
  spot, and no doubt the members of the mob were well acquainted with the
  neighborhood, for the officers said that they seemed to sink into the
  earth, so completely and quickly did they disappear after they had
  completed their work, which was complete with the firing of the volley.

  Hannah Mabry was taken to the Charity Hospital in the ambulance, where
  it was found on examination that she had been shot through the right
  lung, and that the wound was a particularly serious one.

  Her old husband was found in the little wrecked home well nigh
  distracted with fear and grief. It was he who informed the police that
  at the time of the assault the younger Mabrys occupied the front room.
  As he ran about the little home as well as his feeble condition would
  permit he severely lacerated his feet on the glass broken from the
  windows and door. He was escorted to the Sixth Precinct station, where
  he was properly cared for. He could not realize why his little family
  had been so murderously attacked, and was inconsolable when his wife was
  driven off in the ambulance piteously moaning in her pain.

  The search for the perpetrators of the outrage was thorough, but both
  police and armed force of citizens had only their own efforts to rely
  on. The residents of the neighborhood were aroused by the firing, but
  they would give no help in the search and did not appear in the least
  concerned over the affair. Groups were on almost every doorstep, and
  some of them even jeered in a quiet way at the men who were voluntarily
  attempting to capture the members of the mob. Absolutely no information
  could be had from any of them, and the whole affair had the appearance
  of being the work of roughs who either lived in the vicinity, or their
  friends.


+DEATH OF CHARLES+

Friday witnessed the final act in the bloody drama begun by the three
police officers, Aucoin, Mora and Cantrelle. Betrayed into the hands of
the police, Charles, who had already sent two of his would-be murderers to
their death, made a last stand in a small building, 1210 Saratoga Street,
and, still defying his pursuers, fought a mob of twenty thousand people,
single-handed and alone, killing three more men, mortally wounding two
more and seriously wounding nine others. Unable to get to him in his
stronghold, the besiegers set fire to his house of refuge. While the
building was burning Charles was shooting, and every crack of his
death-dealing rifle added another victim to the price which he had placed
upon his own life. Finally, when fire and smoke became too much for flesh
and blood to stand, the long sought for fugitive appeared in the door,
rifle in hand, to charge the countless guns that were drawn upon him.
With a courage which was indescribable, he raised his gun to fire again,
but this time it failed, for a hundred shots riddled his body, and he fell
dead face fronting to the mob. This last scene in the terrible drama is
thus described in the _Times-Democrat_ of July 26:

  Early yesterday afternoon, at 3 o'clock or thereabouts, Police Sergeant
  Gabriel Porteus was instructed by Chief Gaster to go to a house at No.
  1210 Saratoga Street, and search it for the fugitive murderer, Robert
  Charles. A private "tip" had been received at the headquarters that the
  fiend was hiding somewhere on the premises.

  Sergeant Porteus took with him Corporal John R. Lally and Officers
  Zeigel and Essey. The house to which they were directed is a small,
  double frame cottage, standing flush with Saratoga Street, near the
  corner of Clio. It has two street entrances and two rooms on each side,
  one in front and one in the rear. It belongs to the type of cheap little
  dwellings commonly tenanted by Negroes.

  Sergeant Porteus left Ziegel and Essey to guard the outside and went
  with Corporal Lally to the rear house, where he found Jackson and his
  wife in the large room on the left. What immediately ensued is only
  known by the Negroes. They say the sergeant began to question them about
  their lodgers and finally asked them whether they knew anything about
  Robert Charles. They strenuously denied all knowledge of his
  whereabouts.

  The Negroes lied. At that very moment the hunted and desperate murderer
  lay concealed not a dozen feet away. Near the rear, left-hand corner of
  the room is a closet or pantry, about three feet deep, and perhaps eight
  feet long. The door was open and Charles was crouching, Winchester in
  hand, in the dark further end.

  Near the closet door was a bucket of water, and Jackson says that
  Sergeant Porteous walked toward it to get a drink. At the next moment a
  shot rang out and the brave officer fell dead. Lally was shot directly
  afterward. Exactly how and where will never be known, but the
  probabilities are that the black fiend sent a bullet into him before he
  recovered from his surprise at the sudden onslaught. Then the murderer
  dashed out of the back door and disappeared.

  The neighborhood was already agog with the tragic events of the two
  preceding days, and the sound of the shots was a signal for wild and
  instant excitement. In a few moments a crowd had gathered and people
  were pouring in by the hundred from every point of the compass. Jackson
  and his wife had fled and at first nobody knew what had happened, but
  the surmise that Charles had recommenced his bloody work was on every
  tongue and soon some of the bolder found their way to the house in the
  rear. There the bleeding forms of the two policemen told the story.

  Lally was still breathing, and a priest was sent for to administer the
  last rites. Father Fitzgerald responded, and while he was bending over
  the dying man the outside throng was rushing wildly through the
  surrounding yards and passageways searching for the murderer. "Where is
  he?" "What has become of him?" were the questions on every lip.

  Suddenly the answer came in a shot from the room directly overhead. It
  was fired through a window facing Saratoga Street, and the bullet struck
  down a young man named Alfred J. Bloomfield, who was standing in the
  narrow passage-way between the two houses. He fell on his knees and a
  second bullet stretched him dead.

  When he fled from the closet Charles took refuge in the upper story of
  the house. There are four windows on that floor, two facing toward
  Saratoga Street and two toward Rampart. The murderer kicked several
  breaches in the frail central partition, so he could rush from side to
  side, and like a trapped beast, prepared to make his last stand.

  Nobody had dreamed that he was still in the house, and when Bloomfield
  was shot there was a headlong stampede. It was some minutes before the
  exact situation was understood. Then rifles and pistols began to speak,
  and a hail of bullets poured against the blind frontage of the old
  house. Every one hunted some coign of vantage, and many climbed to
  adjacent roofs. Soon the glass of the four upper windows was shattered
  by flying lead. The fusillade sounded like a battle, and the excitement
  upon the streets was indescribable.

  Throughout all this hideous uproar Charles seems to have retained a
  certain diabolical coolness. He kept himself mostly out of sight, but
  now and then he thrust the gleaming barrel of his rifle through one of
  the shattered window panes and fired at his besiegers. He worked the
  weapon with incredible rapidity, discharging from three to five
  cartridges each time before leaping back to a place of safety. These
  replies came from all four windows indiscriminately, and showed that he
  was keeping a close watch in every direction. His wonderful marksmanship
  never failed him for a moment, and when he missed it was always by the
  narrowest margin only.

  On the Rampart Street side of the house there are several sheds,
  commanding an excellent range of the upper story. Detective Littleton,
  Andrew Van Kuren of the Workhouse force and several others climbed upon
  one of these and opened fire on the upper windows, shooting whenever
  they could catch a glimpse of the assassin. Charles responded with his
  rifle, and presently Van Kuren climbed down to find a better position.
  He was crossing the end of the shed when he was killed.

  Another of Charles's bullets found its billet in the body of Frank
  Evans, an ex-member of the police force. He was on the Rampart Street
  side firing whenever he had an opportunity. Officer J.W. Bofill and A.S.
  Leclerc were also wounded in the fusillade.

  While the events thus briefly outlined were transpiring time was a-wing,
  and the cooler headed in the crowd began to realize that some quick and
  desperate expedient must be adopted to insure the capture of the fiend
  and to avert what might be a still greater tragedy than any yet enacted.
  For nearly two hours the desperate monster had held his besiegers at
  bay, darkness would soon be at hand and no one could predict what might
  occur if he made a dash for liberty in the dark.

  At this critical juncture it was suggested that the house be fired. The
  plan came as an inspiration, and was adopted as the only solution of the
  situation. The wretched old rookery counted for nothing against the
  possible continued sacrifice of human life, and steps were immediately
  taken to apply the torch. The fire department had been summoned to the
  scene soon after the shooting began; its officers were warned to be
  ready to prevent a spread of the conflagration, and several men rushed
  into the lower right-hand room and started a blaze in one corner.

  They first fired an old mattress, and soon smoke was pouring out in
  dense volumes. It filled the interior of the ramshackle structure, and
  it was evident that the upper story would soon become untenable. An
  interval of tense excitement followed, and all eyes were strained for a
  glimpse of the murderer when he emerged.

  Then came the thrilling climax. Smoked out of his den, the desperate
  fiend descended the stairs and entered the lower room. Some say he
  dashed into the yard, glaring around vainly for some avenue of escape;
  but, however that may be, he was soon a few moments later moving about
  behind the lower windows. A dozen shots were sent through the wall in
  the hope of reaching him, but he escaped unscathed. Then suddenly the
  door on the right was flung open and he dashed out. With head lowered
  and rifle raised ready to fire on the instant, Charles dashed straight
  for the rear door of the front cottage. To reach it he had to traverse a
  little walk shaded by a vineclad arbor. In the back room, with a cocked
  revolver in his hand, was Dr. C.A. Noiret, a young medical student, who
  was aiding the citizens' posse. As he sprang through the door Charles
  fired a shot, and the bullet whizzed past the doctor's head. Before it
  could be repeated Noiret's pistol cracked and the murderer reeled,
  turned half around and fell on his back. The doctor sent another ball
  into his body as he struck the floor, and half a dozen men, swarming
  into the room from the front, riddled the corpse with bullets.

  Private Adolph Anderson of the Connell Rifles was the first man to
  announce the death of the wretch. He rushed to the street door, shouted
  the news to the crowd, and a moment later the bleeding body was dragged
  to the pavement and made the target of a score of pistols. It was shot,
  kicked and beaten almost out of semblance to humanity....

  The limp dead body was dropped at the edge of the sidewalk and from
  there dragged to the muddy roadway by half a hundred hands. There in the
  road more shots were fired into the body. Corporal Trenchard, a
  brother-in-law of Porteus, led the shooting into the inanimate clay.
  With each shot there was a cheer for the work that had been done and
  curses and imprecations on the inanimate mass of riddled flesh that was
  once Robert Charles.

  Cries of "Burn him! Burn him!" were heard from Clio Street all the way
  to Erato Street, and it was with difficulty that the crowd was
  restrained from totally destroying the wretched dead body. Some of those
  who agitated burning even secured a large vessel of kerosene, which had
  previously been brought to the scene for the purpose of firing Charles's
  refuge, and for a time it looked as though this vengeance might be
  wreaked on the body. The officers, however, restrained this move,
  although they were powerless to prevent the stamping and kicking of the
  body by the enraged crowd.

  After the infuriated citizens had vented their spleen on the body of the
  dead Negro it was loaded into the patrol wagon. The police raised the
  body of the heavy black from the ground and literally chucked it into
  the space on the floor of the wagon between the seats. They threw it
  with a curse hissed more than uttered and born of the bitterness which
  was rankling in their breasts at the thought of Charles having taken so
  wantonly the lives of four of the best of their fellow-officers.

  When the murderer's body landed in the wagon it fell in such a position
  that the hideously mutilated head, kicked, stamped and crushed, hung
  over the end.

  As the wagon moved off, the followers, who were protesting against its
  being carried off, declaring that it should be burned, poked and struck
  it with sticks, beating it into such a condition that it was utterly
  impossible to tell what the man ever looked like.

  As the patrol wagon rushed through the rough street, jerking and
  swaying from one side of the thoroughfare to the other, the gory,
  mud-smeared head swayed and swung and jerked about in a sickening
  manner, the dark blood dripping on the steps and spattering the body of
  the wagon and the trousers of the policemen standing on the step.


+MOB BRUTALITY+

The brutality of the mob was further shown by the unspeakable cruelty with
which it beat, shot and stabbed to death an unoffending colored man, name
unknown, who happened to be walking on the street with no thought that he
would be set upon and killed simply because he was a colored man. The
_Times-Democrat_'s description of the outrage is as follows:

  While the fight between the Negro desperado and the citizens was in
  progress yesterday afternoon at Clio and Saratoga Streets another
  tragedy was being enacted downtown in the French quarter, but it was a
  very one-sided affair. The object of the white man's wrath was, of
  course, a Negro, but, unlike Charles, he showed no fight, but tried to
  escape from the furious mob which was pursuing him, and which finally
  put an end to his existence in a most cruel manner.

  The Negro, whom no one seemed to know--at any rate no one could be found
  in the vicinity of the killing who could tell who he was--was walking
  along the levee, as near as could be learned, when he was attacked by a
  number of white longshoremen or screwmen. For what reason, if there was
  any reason other than the fact that he was a Negro, could not be
  learned, and immediately they pounced upon him he broke ground and
  started on a desperate run for his life.

  The hunted Negro started off the levee toward the French Vegetable
  Market, changed his course out the sidewalk toward Gallatin Street. The
  angry, yelling mob was close at his heels, and increasing steadily as
  each block was traversed. At Gallatin Street he turned up that
  thoroughfare, doubled back into North Peters Street and ran into the
  rear of No. 1216 of that street, which is occupied by Chris Reuter as a
  commission store and residence.

  He rushed frantically through the place and out on to the gallery on the
  Gallatin Street side. From this gallery he jumped to the street and fell
  flat on his back on the sidewalk. Springing to his feet as soon as
  possible, with a leaden, hail fired by the angry mob whistling about
  him, he turned to his merciless pursuers in an appealing way, and,
  throwing up one hand, told them not to shoot any more, that they could
  take him as he was.

  But the hail of lead continued, and the unfortunate Negro finally
  dropped to the sidewalk, mortally wounded. The mob then rushed upon him,
  still continuing the fusillade, and upon reaching his body a number of
  Italians, who had joined the howling mob, reached down and stabbed him
  in the back and buttock with big knives. Others fired shots into his
  head until his teeth were shot out, three shots having been fired into
  his mouth. There were bullet wounds all over his body.

  Others who witnessed the affair declared that the man was fired at as he
  was running up the stairs leading to the living apartments above the
  store, and that after jumping to the sidewalk and being knocked down by
  a bullet he jumped up and ran across the street, then ran back and tried
  to get back into the commission store. The Italians, it is said, were
  all drunk, and had been shooting firecrackers. Tiring of this, they
  began shooting at Negroes, and when the unfortunate man who was killed
  ran by they joined in the chase.

  No one was arrested for the shooting, the neighborhood having been
  deserted by the police, who were sent up to the place where Charles was
  fighting so desperately. No one could or would give the names of any of
  those who had participated in the chase and the killing, nor could any
  one be found who knew who the Negro was. The patrol wagon was called and
  the terribly mutilated body sent to the morgue and the coroner notified.

  The murdered Negro was copper colored, about 5 feet 11 inches in height,
  about 35 years of age, and was dressed in blue overalls and a brown
  slouch hat. At 10:30 o'clock the vicinity of the French Market was very
  quiet. Squads of special officers were patrolling the neighborhood, and
  there did not seem to be any prospects of disorder.

During the entire time the mob held the city in its hands and went about
holding up street cars and searching them, taking from them colored men to
assault, shoot and kill, chasing colored men upon the public square,
through alleys and into houses of anybody who would take them in, breaking
into the homes of defenseless colored men and women and beating aged and
decrepit men and women to death, the police and the legally constituted
authorities showed plainly where their sympathies were, for in no case
reported through the daily papers does there appear the arrest, trial and
conviction of one of the mob for any of the brutalities which occurred.
The ringleaders of the mob were at no time disguised. Men were chased,
beaten and killed by white brutes, who boasted of their crimes, and the
murderers still walk the streets of New Orleans, well known and absolutely
exempt from prosecution. Not only were they exempt from prosecution by the
police while the town was in the hands of the mob, but even now that law
and order is supposed to resume control, these men, well known, are not
now, nor ever will be, called to account for the unspeakable brutalities
of that terrible week. On the other hand, the colored men who were beaten
by the police and dragged into the station for purposes of intimidation,
were quickly called up before the courts and fined or sent to jail upon
the statement of the police. Instances of Louisiana justice as it is
dispensed in New Orleans are here quoted from the _Times-Democrat_ of July
26:

  +Justice Dealt Out to Folk Who Talked Too Much+

  All the Negroes and whites who were arrested in the vicinity of
  Tuesday's tragedy had a hard time before Recorder Hughes yesterday. Lee
  Jackson was the first prisoner, and the evidence established that he
  made his way to the vicinity of the crime and told his Negro friends
  that he thought a good many more policemen ought to be killed. Jackson
  said he was drunk when he made the remark. He was fined $25 or thirty
  days.

  John Kennedy was found wandering about the street Tuesday night with an
  open razor in his hand, and he was given $25 or thirty days.

  Edward McCarthy, a white man, who arrived only four days since from New
  York, went to the scene of the excitement at the corner of Third and
  Rampart Streets, and told the Negroes that they were as good as any
  white man. This remark was made by McCarthy, as another white man said
  the Negroes should be lynched. McCarthy told the recorder that he
  considered a Negro as good as a white in body and soul. He was fined $25
  or thirty days.

  James Martin, Simon Montegut, Eddie McCall, Alex Washington and Henry
  Turner were up for failing to move on. Martin proved that he was at the
  scene to assist the police and was discharged. Montegut, being a
  cripple, was also released, but the others were fined $25 or thirty days
  each.

  Eddie Williams for refusing to move on was given $25 or thirty days.

  Matilda Gamble was arrested by the police for saying that two officers
  were killed and it was a pity more were not shot. She was given $25 or
  thirty days.


+INSOLENT BLACKS+

"Recorder Hughes received Negroes in the first recorder's office yesterday
morning in a way that they will remember for a long time, and all of them
were before the magistrate for having caused trouble through incendiary
remarks concerning the death of Captain Day and Patrolman Lamb."

"Lee Jackson was before the recorder and was fined $25 or thirty days. He
was lippy around where the trouble happened Tuesday morning, and some
white men punched him good and hard and the police took him. Then the
recorder gave him a dose, and now he is in the parish prison."

"John Kennedy was another black who got into trouble. He said that the
shooting of the police by Charles was a good thing, and for this he was
pounded. Patrolman Lorenzo got him and saved him from being lynched, for
the black had an open razor. He was fined $25 or thirty days."

"Edward McCarthy, a white man, mixed up with the crowd, and an expression
of sympathy nearly cost him his head, for some whites about started for
him, administering licks and blows with fists and umbrellas. The recorder
fined him $25 or thirty days. He is from New York."

"Then James Martin, a white man, and Simon Montegut, Eddie Call, Henry
Turner and Alex Washington were before the magistrate for having failed to
move on when the police ordered them from the square where the bluecoats
were Tuesday, waiting in the hope of catching Charles. All save Martin and
Montegut were fined."

"Eddie Williams, a little Negro who was extremely fresh with the police,
was fined $10 or ten days."


+SHOCKING BRUTALITY+

The whole city was at the mercy of the mob and the display of brutality
was a disgrace to civilization. One instance is described in the
_Picayune_ as follows:

  A smaller party detached itself from the mob at Washington and Rampart
  Streets, and started down the latter thoroughfare. One of the foremost
  spied a Negro, and immediately there was a rush for the unfortunate
  black man. With the sticks they had torn from fences on the line of
  march the young outlaws attacked the black and clubbed him unmercifully,
  acting more like demons than human beings. After being severely beaten
  over the head, the Negro started to run with the whole gang at his
  heels. Several revolvers were brought into play and pumped their lead at
  the refugee. The Negro made rapid progress and took refuge behind the
  blinds of a little cottage in Rampart Street, but he had been seen, and
  the mob hauled him from his hiding place and again commenced beating
  him. There were more this time, some twenty or thirty, all armed with
  sticks and heavy clubs, and under their incessant blows the Negro could
  not last long. He begged for mercy, and his cries were most pitiful, but
  a mob has no heart, and his cries were only answered with more blows.

  "For God's sake, boss, I ain't done nothin'. Don't kill me. I swear I
  ain't done nothin'."

  The white brutes turned

+  A DEAF EAR TO THE PITYING CRIES+

  of the black wretch and the drubbing continued. The cries subsided into
  moans, and soon the black swooned away into unconsciousness. Still not
  content with their heartless work, they pulled the Negro out and kicked
  him into the gutter. For the time those who had beaten the black seemed
  satisfied and left him groaning in the gutter, but others came up, and,
  regretting that they had not had a hand in the affair, they determined
  to evidence their bravery to their fellows and beat the man while he was
  in the gutter, hurling rocks and stones at his black form. One
  thoughtless white brute, worse even than the black slayer of the police
  officers, thought to make himself a hero in the eyes of his fellows and
  fired his revolver repeatedly into the helpless wretch. It was dark and
  the fellow probably aimed carelessly. After firing three or four shots
  he also left without knowing what extent of injury he inflicted on the
  black wretch who was left lying in the gutter.



+MURDER ON THE LEVEE+


One part of the crowd made a raid on the tenderloin district, hoping to
find there some belated Negro for a sacrifice. They were urged on by the
white prostitutes, who applauded their murderous mission. Says an account:

  The red light district was all excitement. Women--that is, the white
  women--were out on their stoops and peeping over their galleries and
  through their windows and doors, shouting to the crowd to go on with
  their work, and kill Negroes for them.

  "Our best wishes, boys," they encouraged; and the mob answered with
  shouts, and whenever a Negro house was sighted a bombardment was started
  on the doors and windows.

No colored men were found on the streets until the mob reached Custom
House Place and Villiers Streets. Here a victim was found and brutally put
to death. The _Picayune_ description is as follows:

  Some stragglers had run a Negro into a car at the corner of Bienville
  and Villere Streets. He was seeking refuge in the conveyance, and he
  believed that the car would not be stopped and could speed along. But
  the mob determined to stop the car, and ordered the motorman to halt. He
  put on his brake. Some white men were in the car.

  "Get out, fellows," shouted several of the mob.

  "All whites fall out," was the second cry, and the poor Negro understood
  that it was meant that he should stay in the car.

  He wanted to save his life. The poor fellow crawled under the seats. But
  some one in the crowd saw him and yelled that he was hiding. Two or
  three men climbed through the windows with their pistols; others jumped
  over the motorman's board, and dozens tumbled into the rear of the car.
  Big, strong hands got the Negro by the shirt. He was dragged out of the
  conveyance, and was pushed to the street. Some fellow ran up and struck
  him with a club. The blow was heavy, but it did not fell him, and the
  Negro ran toward Canal Street, stealing along the wall of the Tulane
  Medical Building. Fifty men ran after him, caught the poor fellow and
  hurried him back into the crowd. Fists were aimed at him, then clubs
  went upon his shoulders, and finally the black plunged into the gutter.

  A gun was fired, and the Negro, who had just gotten to his feet, dropped
  again. He tried to get up, but a volley was sent after him, and in a
  little while he was dead.

  The crowd looked on at the terrible work. Then the lights in the houses
  of ill-fame began to light up again, and women peeped out of the blinds.
  The motorman was given the order to go on. The gong clanged and the
  conveyance sped out of the way. For half an hour the crowd held their
  place at the corner, then the patrol wagon came and the body was picked
  up and hurried to the morgue.

  Coroner Richard held an autopsy on the body of the Negro who was forced
  out of car 98 of the Villere line and shot down. It was found that he
  was wounded four times, the most serious wound being that which struck
  him in the right side, passing through the lungs, and causing
  hemorrhages, which brought about death.

  Nobody tried to identify the poor fellow and his name is unknown.


+A VICTIM IN THE MARKET+


Soon after the murder of the man on the street car many of the same mob
marched down to the market place. There they found a colored market man
named Louis Taylor, who had gone to begin his early morning's work. He was
at once set upon by the mob and killed. The _Picayune_ account says:

  Between 1 and 2 o'clock this morning a mob of several hundred men and
  boys, made up of participants in many of the earlier affairs, marched on
  the French Market. Louis Taylor, a Negro vegetable carrier, who is about
  thirty years of age, was sitting at the soda water stand. As soon as the
  mob saw him fire was opened and the Negro took to his heels. He ran
  directly into another section of the mob and any number of shots were
  fired at him. He fell, face down, on the floor of the market.

  The police in the neighborhood rallied hurriedly and found the victim of
  mob violence seemingly lifeless. Before they arrived the Negro had been
  beaten severely about the head and body. The ambulance was summoned and
  Taylor was carried to the charity hospital, where it was found that he
  had been shot through the abdomen and arm. The examination was a hurried
  one, but it sufficed to show that Taylor was mortally wounded.

  After shooting Taylor the members of the mob were pluming themselves on
  their exploit. "The Nigger was at the soda water stand and we commenced
  shooting him," said one of the rioters. "He put his hands up and ran,
  and we shot until he fell. I understand that he is still alive. If he
  is, he is a wonder. He was certainly shot enough to be killed."

  The members of the mob readily admitted that they had taken part in the
  assaults which marked the earlier part of the evening.

  "We were up on Jackson Avenue and killed a Nigger on Villere Street. We
  came down here, saw a nigger and killed him, too." This was the way they
  told the story.

  "Boys, we are out of ammunition," said someone.

  "Well, we will keep on like we are, and if we can't get some before
  morning, we will take it. We have got to keep this thing up, now we have
  started."

  This declaration was greeted by a chorus of applauding yells, and the
  crowd started up the levee. Half of the men in the crowd, and they were
  all of them young, were drunk.

  Taylor, when seen at the charity hospital, was suffering greatly, and
  presented a pitiable spectacle. His clothing was covered with blood, and
  his face was beaten almost into a pulp. He said that he had gone to the
  market to work and was quietly sitting down when the mob came and began
  to fire on him. He was not aware at first that the crowd was after him.
  When he saw its purpose he tried to run, but fell. He didn't know any of
  the men in the crowd. There is hardly a chance that Taylor will recover.

  The police told the crowd to move on, but no attempt was made to arrest
  anyone.


+A GRAY-HAIRED VICTIM+

The bloodthirsty barbarians, having tasted blood, continued their hunt and
soon ran across an old man of seventy-five years. His life had been spent
in hard work about the French market, and he was well known as an
unoffending, peaceable and industrious old man.

But that made no difference to the mob. He was a Negro, and with a
fiendishness that was worse than that of cannibals they beat his life out.
The report says:

  There was another gang of men parading the streets in the lower part of
  the city, looking for any stray Negro who might be on the streets. As
  they neared the corner of Dauphine and Kerlerec, a square below
  Esplanade Avenue, they came upon Baptiste Thilo, an aged Negro, who
  works in the French Market.

  Thilo for years has been employed by the butchers and fish merchants to
  carry baskets from the stalls to the wagons, and unload the wagons as
  they arrive in the morning. He was on his way to the market, when the
  mob came upon him. One of the gang struck the old Negro, and as he fell,
  another in the crowd, supposed to be a young fellow, fired a shot. The
  bullet entered the body just below the right nipple.

  As the Negro fell the crowd looked into his face and they discovered
  then that the victim was very old. The young man who did the shooting
  said: "Oh, he is an old Negro. I'm sorry that I shot him."

  This is all the old Negro received in the way of consolation.

  He was left where he fell, but later staggered to his feet and made his
  way to the third precinct station. There the police summoned the
  ambulance and the students pronounced the wound very dangerous. He was
  carried to the hospital as rapidly as possible.

  There was no arrest.

Just before daybreak the mob found another victim. He, too, was on his way
to market, driving a meat wagon. But little is told of his treatment,
nothing more than the following brief statement:

  At nearly 3 o'clock this morning a report was sent to the Third Precinct
  station that a Negro was lying on the sidewalk at the corner of Decatur
  and St. Philip. The man had been pulled off of a meat wagon and riddled
  with bullets.

  When the police arrived he was insensible and apparently dying. The
  ambulance students attended the Negro and pronounced the wounds fatal.

  There was nothing found which would lead to the discovery of his
  identity.


+FUN IN GRETNA+

If there are any persons so deluded as to think that human life in the
South is valued any more than the life of a brute, he will be speedily
undeceived by reading the accounts of unspeakable barbarism committed by
the mob in and around New Orleans. In no other civilized country in the
world, nay, more, in no land of barbarians would it be possible to
duplicate the scenes of brutality that are reported from New Orleans. In
the heat of blind fury one might conceive how a mad mob might beat and
kill a man taken red-handed in a brutal murder. But it is almost past
belief to read that civilized white people, men who boast of their
chivalry and blue blood, actually had fun in beating, chasing and shooting
men who had no possible connection with any crime.

But this actually happened in Gretna, a few miles from New Orleans. In its
description of the scenes of Tuesday night, the _Picayune_ mentions the
brutal chase of several colored men whom the mob sought to kill. In the
instances mentioned, the paper said:

  Gretna had its full share of excitement between 8 and 11 o'clock last
  night, in connection with a report that spread through the town that a
  Negro resembling the slayer of Police Captain Day, of New Orleans, had
  been seen on the outskirts of the place.

  It is true that a suspicious-looking Negro was observed by the residents
  of Madison and Amelia Streets lurking about the fences of that
  neighborhood just after dark, and shortly before 8 o'clock John Fist, a
  young white man, saw the Negro on Fourth Street. He followed the darkey
  a short distance, and, coming upon Robert Moore, who is known about town
  as the "black detective," Fist pointed the Negro out and Moore at once
  made a move toward the stranger. The latter observed Moore making in his
  direction, and, without a word, he sped in the direction of the Brooklyn
  pasture, Moore following and firing several shots at him. In a few
  minutes a half hundred white men, including Chief of Police Miller,
  Constable Dannenhauer, Patrolman Keegan and several special officers,
  all well-armed, joined in the chase, but in the darkness the Negro
  escaped.

  Just as the pursuing party reached town again, two of the residents of
  Lafayette Avenue, Peter Leson and Robert Henning, reported that they had
  just chased and shot at a Negro, who had been seen in the yard of the
  former's house. They were positive the Negro had not escaped from the
  square. Their report was enough to set the appetite of the crowd on
  edge, and the square was quickly surrounded, while several dozens of
  men, armed with lanterns and revolvers, made a search of every yard and
  under every house in the square. No Negro was found.

  The crowd of armed men was constantly swelling, and at 10 o'clock it had
  reached the proportions of a small army. At 10:30 o'clock an outbound
  freight train is due to pass through Gretna on the Texas and Pacific
  Road, and the crowd, believing that Captain Day's slayer might be aboard
  one of the cars attempting to leave the scene of his crime, resolved to
  inspect the train. As the train stopped at the Madison Street crossing
  the engineer was requested to pull very slowly through the town, in
  order that the trucks of the cars might be examined. There was a string
  of armed men on each side of the railroad track and in a few moments a
  Negro was espied riding between two cars. A half dozen weapons were
  pointed at him and he was ordered to come out. He sprang out with
  alacrity and was pounced upon almost before he reached the ground.
  Robert Moore grabbed him and pushed an ugly-looking Derringer under his
  nose and the Negro threw up both hands. Constable Dannenhauer and
  Patrolman Keegan took charge of him and hustled him off to jail, where
  he was locked up. The Negro does not at all resemble Robert Charles, but
  it was best for his sake that he was placed under lock and key. The
  crowd was not in a humor to let any Negro pass muster last night. The
  prisoner gave his name as Luke Wallace.

  But now came the real excitement. The train had slowed down almost to a
  standstill, in the very heart of town. Somebody shouted: "There he goes,
  on top of the train!" And sure enough, somebody was going. It was a
  Negro, too, and he was making a bee-line for the front end of the train.
  A veritable shower of bullets, shot and rifle balls greeted the flying
  form, but on it sped. The locomotive had stopped in the middle of the
  square between La voisier and Newton Streets, and the Negro, flying with
  the speed of the wind along the top of the cars, reached the first car
  of the train and jumped to the tender and then into the cab. As he did
  several white men standing at the locomotive made a rush into the cab.
  The Negro sprang swiftly out of the other side, on to the sidewalk. But
  there were several more men, and as he realized that he was rushing
  right into their arms he made a spring to leap over the fence of Mrs.
  Linden's home, on the wood side of the track. Before the Negro got to
  the top one white man had hold of his legs, while another rushed up,
  pistol in hand. The man who was holding the darkey's legs was jostled
  out of the way and the man with the pistol, standing directly beneath
  the Negro, sent two bullets at him.

  There was a wild scramble, and the vision of a fleeing form in the
  Linden yard, but that was the last seen of the black man. The yard was
  entered and searched, and neighboring yards were also searched, but not
  even the trace of blood was found. It is almost impossible to believe
  that the Negro was not wounded, for the man who fired at him held the
  pistol almost against the Negro's body.

  The shots brought out almost everybody--white--in town, and though there
  was nothing to show for the exciting work, except the arrest of the
  Negro, who doesn't answer the description of the man wanted, Gretna's
  male population had its little fan and felt amply repaid for all the
  trouble it was put to, and all the ammunition it wasted.


+BRUTALITY IN NEW ORLEANS+

Mob rule reigned supreme Wednesday, and the scenes that were enacted
challenge belief. How many colored men and women were abused and injured
is not known, for those who escaped were glad to make a place of refuge
and took no time to publish their troubles. The mob made no attempt to
find Charles; its only purpose was to pursue, beat and kill any colored
man or woman who happened to come in sight. Speaking editorially, the
_Picayune_ of Thursday, the twenty-sixth of July, said:


+ESCAPED WITH THEIR LIVES+

At the Charity Hospital Wednesday night more than a score of people were
treated for wounds received at the hands of the mob. Some were able to
tell of their mistreatment, and their recitals are briefly given in the
_Picayune_ as follows:

  Alex. Ruffin, who is quite seriously injured, is a Pullman car porter, a
  native of Chicago. He reached New Orleans at 9:20 o'clock last night,
  and after finishing his work, boarded a Henry Clay Avenue car to go to
  Delachaise Street, where he has a sick son.

  "I hadn't ridden any way," said he, "when I saw a lot of white folks.
  They were shouting to 'Get the Niggers.' I didn't know they were after
  every colored man they saw, and sat still. Two or three men jumped on
  the car and started at me. One of them hit me over the head with a
  slungshot, and they started to shooting at me. I jumped out of the car
  and ran, although I had done nothing. They shot me in the arm and in the
  leg. I would certainly have been killed had not some gentleman taken my
  part. If I had known New Orleans was so excited I would never have left
  my car."

  George Morris is the name of a Negro who was badly injured by a mob
  which went through the Poydras Market. Morris is employed as watchman
  there. He heard the noise of the passing crowd and looked out to see
  what the matter was. As soon as the mob saw him its members started
  after him.

  "One man hit me over the head with a club," said George, after his
  wounds had been dressed, "and somebody cut me in the back. I didn't
  hardly think what was the matter at first, but when I saw they were
  after me I ran for my life. I ran to the coffee stand, where I work, for
  protection, but they were right after me, and somebody shot me in the
  back. At last the police got me away from the crowd. Just before I was
  hit a friend of mine, who was in the crowd, said, 'You had better go
  home, Nigger; they're after your kind.' I didn't know then what he
  meant. I found out pretty quick."

  Morris is at the hospital. He is a perfect wreck, and while he will
  probably get well, he will have had a close call.

  Esther Fields is a Negro washerwoman who lives at South Claiborne and
  Toledano Streets. She was at home when she heard a big noise and went
  out to investigate. She ran into the arms of the mob, and was beaten
  into insensibility in less time than it takes to tell it. Esther is
  being treated at the charity hospital, and should be able to get about
  in a few days. The majority of her bruises are about the head.

  T.P. Sanders fell at the hands of the Jackson Avenue mob. He lives at
  1927 Jackson Avenue, and was sitting in front of his home when he saw
  the crowd marching out the street. He stayed to see what the excitement
  was all about, and was shot in the knee and thorax and horribly beaten
  about the head before the mob came to the conclusion that he had been
  done for, and passed on. The ambulance was called and he was picked up
  and carried to the charity hospital, where his wounds were dressed and
  pronounced serious.

  Oswald McMahon is nothing more than a boy. He was shot in the leg and
  afterward carried to the hospital. His injuries are very slight.

  Dan White is another charity hospital patient. He is a Negro roustabout
  and was sitting in the bar room at Poydras and Franklin Streets when a
  mob passed along and espied him. He was shot in the hand, and would have
  been roughly dealt with had some policeman not been luckily near and
  rescued him.

  In addition to the Negroes who suffered from the violence of the mob
  there were several patients treated at the hospital during the night who
  had been with the rioters and had been struck by stray bullets or
  injured in scuffles. None of this class were hurt to any extent. They
  got their wounds dressed and went out again.


+WAS CHARLES A DESPERADO?+

The press of the country has united in declaring that Robert Charles was a
desperado. As usual, when dealing with a negro, he is assumed to be guilty
because he is charged. Even the most conservative of journals refuse to
ask evidence to prove that the dead man was a criminal, and that his life
had been given over to lawbreaking. The minute that the news was flashed
across the country that he had shot a white man it was at once declared
that he was a fiend incarnate, and that when he was killed the community
would be ridden of a black-hearted desperado. The reporters of the New
Orleans papers, who were in the best position to trace the record of this
man's life, made every possible effort to find evidence to prove that he
was a villain unhung. With all the resources at their command, and
inspired by intense interest to paint him as black a villain as possible,
these reporters signally failed to disclose a single indictment which
charged Robert Charles with a crime. Because they failed to find any legal
evidence that Charles was a lawbreaker and desperado his accusers gave
full license to their imagination and distorted the facts that they had
obtained, in every way possible, to prove a course of criminality, which
the records absolutely refuse to show.

Charles had his first encounter with the police Monday night, in which he
was shot in the street duel which was begun by the police after Officer
Mora had beaten Charles three or four times over the head with his billy
in an attempt to make an illegal arrest. In defending himself against the
combined attack of two officers with a billy and their guns upon him,
Charles shot Officer Mora and escaped.

Early Tuesday morning Charles was traced to Dryades Street by officers who
were instructed to kill him on sight. There, again defending himself, he
shot and killed two officers. This, of course, in the eyes of the American
press, made him a desperado. The New Orleans press, in substantiating the
charges that he was a desperado, make statements which will be interesting
to examine.

In the first place the _New Orleans Times-Democrat_, of July 25, calls
Charles a "ravisher and a daredevil." It says that from all sources that
could be searched "the testimony was cumulative that the character of the
murderer, Robert Charles, is that of a daredevil and a fiend in human
form." Then in the same article it says:

  The belongings of Robert Charles which were found in his room were a
  complete index to the character of the man. Although the room and its
  contents were in a state of chaos on account of the frenzied search for
  clews by officers and citizens, an examination of his personal effects
  revealed the mental state of the murderer and the rancor in his heart
  toward the Caucasian race. Never was the adage, "A little learning is a
  dangerous thing," better exemplified than in the case of the negro who
  shot to death the two officers.

His room was searched, and the evidence upon which the charge that he was
a desperado consisted of pamphlets in support of Negro emigration to
Liberia. On his mantel-piece there was found a bullet mold and an outfit
for reloading cartridges. There were also two pistol scabbards and a
bottle of cocaine. The other evidences that Charles was a desperado the
writer described as follows:

  In his room were found negro periodicals and other "race" propaganda,
  most of which was in the interest of the negro's emigration to Liberia.
  There were Police Gazettes strewn about his room and other papers of a
  similar character. Well-worn textbooks, bearing his name written in his
  own scrawling handwriting, and well-filled copybooks found in his trunk
  showed that he had burnt the midnight oil, and was desirous of improving
  himself intellectually in order that he might conquer the hated white
  race. Much of the literature found among his chattels was of a
  superlatively vituperative character, and attacked the white race in
  unstinted language and asserted the equal rights of the Negro.

  Charles was evidently the local agent of the _Voice of Missions_, a
  "religious" paper, published at Atlanta, as great bundles of that sheet
  were found. It is edited by one Bishop Turner, and seems to be the
  official organ of all haters of the white race. Its editorials are
  anarchistic in the extreme, and urge upon the negro that the sooner he
  realizes that he is as good as the white man the better it will be for
  him. The following verses were clipped from the journal; they were
  marked "till forbidden," and appeared in several successive numbers:


        OUR SENTIMENTS

        H.M.T.

        My country, 'tis of thee,
        Dear land of Africa,
          Of thee we sing.
        Land where our fathers died,
        Land of the Negro's pride,
          God's truth shall ring.

        My native country, thee,
        Land of the black and free,
          Thy name I love;
        To see thy rocks and rills,
        Thy woods and matchless hills,
          Like that above.

        When all thy slanderous ghouls,
        In the bosom of sheol,
          Forgotten lie,
        Thy monumental name shall live,
        And suns thy royal brow shall gild,
        Upheaved to heaven high,
          O'ertopping thrones.

  There were no valuables in his room, and if he was a professional thief
  he had his headquarters for storing his plunder at some other place than
  his room on Fourth Street. Nothing was found in his room that could lead
  to the belief that he was a thief, except fifty or more small bits of
  soap. The inference was that every place he visited he took all of the
  soap lying around, as all of the bits were well worn and had seen long
  service on the washstand.

  His wearing apparel was little more than rags, and financially he was
  evidently not in a flourishing condition. He was in no sense a skilled
  workman, and his room showed, in fact, that he was nothing more than a
  laborer.

  The "philosopher in the garret" was a dirty wretch, and his room, his
  bedding and his clothing were nasty and filthy beyond belief. His object
  in life seemed to have been the discomfiture of the white race, and to
  this purpose he devoted himself with zeal. He declared himself to be a
  "patriot," and wished to be the Moses of his race.

Under the title of "The Making of a Monster," the reporter attempts to
give "something of the personality of the archfiend, Charles." Giving his
imagination full vent the writer says:

  It is only natural that the deepest interest should attach to the
  personality of Robert Charles. What manner of man was this fiend
  incarnate? What conditions developed him? Who were his preceptors? From
  what ancestral strain, if any, did he derive his ferocious hatred of the
  whites, his cunning, his brute courage, the apostolic zeal which he
  displayed in spreading the propaganda of African equality? These are
  questions involving one of the most remarkable psychological problems of
  modern times.

In answer to the questions which he propounds, the reporter proceeds to
admit that he did not learn anything of a very desperate nature connected
with Charles. He says:

  Although Charles was a familiar figure to scores of Negroes in New
  Orleans, and they had been more or less intimately acquainted with him
  for over two years, curiously little can be learned of his habits or
  mode of life. Since the perpetration of his terrible series of crimes it
  goes without saying that his former friends are inclined to be reticent,
  but it is reasonably certain that they have very little to tell. In
  regard to himself, Charles was singularly reticent for a Negro. He did
  not even indulge in the usual lying about his prowess and his
  adventures. This was possibly due to the knowledge that he was wanted
  for a couple of murders. The man had sense enough to know that it would
  be highly unwise to excite any curiosity about his past.

  When Charles first came to New Orleans he worked here and there as a day
  laborer. He was employed at different times in a sawmill, on the street
  gangs, as a roustabout on the levee, as a helper at the sugar works and
  as a coal shoveler in the engine room of the St. Charles Hotel. At each
  of the places where he worked he was known as a quiet, rather surly
  fellow, who had little to say to anybody, and generally performed his
  tasks in morose silence. He managed to convey the impression, however,
  of being a man of more than ordinary intelligence.

  A Negro named William Butts, who drives a team on the levee and lives on
  Washington Street, near Baronne, told a _Times-Democrat_ reporter
  yesterday that Charles got a job about a year ago as agent for a
  Liberian Immigration Society, which has headquarters at Birmingham, and
  was much elated at the prospect of making a living without hard labor.

According to the further investigations of this reporter, Charles was also
agent for Bishop Turner's _Voice of Missions_, the colored missionary
organ of the African Methodist Church, edited by H.M. Turner, of Atlanta,
Georgia. Concerning his service as agent for the _Voice of Missions_, the
reporter says:

  He secured a number of subscribers and visited them once a month to
  collect the installments. In order to insure regular payments it was
  necessary to keep up enthusiasm, which was prone to wane, and Charles
  consequently became an active and continual preacher of the propaganda
  of hatred. Whatever may have been his private sentiments at the outset,
  this constant harping on one string must eventually have had a powerful
  effect upon his own mind.

  Exactly how he received his remuneration is uncertain, but he told
  several of his friends that he got a "big commission." Incidentally he
  solicited subscribers for a Negro paper called the _Voice of the
  Missions_, and when he struck a Negro who did not want to go to Africa
  himself, he begged contributions for the "good of the cause."

  In the course of time Charles developed into a fanatic on the subject of
  the Negro oppression and neglected business to indulge in wild tirades
  whenever he could find a listener. He became more anxious to make
  converts than to obtain subscribers, and the more conservative darkies
  began to get afraid of him. Meanwhile he got into touch with certain
  agitators in the North and made himself a distributing agent for their
  literature, a great deal of which he gave away. Making money was a
  secondary consideration to "the cause."

  One of the most enthusiastic advocates of the Liberian scheme is the
  colored Bishop H.M. Turner, of Atlanta. Turner is a man of unusual
  ability, has been over to Africa personally several times, and has made
  himself conspicuous by denouncing laws which he claimed discriminated
  against the blacks. Charles was one of the bishop's disciples and
  evidence has been found that seems to indicate they were in
  correspondence.

This was all that the _Times-Democrat_'s reporters could find after the
most diligent search to prove that Charles was the fiend incarnate which
the press of New Orleans and elsewhere declared him to be.

The reporters of the _New Orleans Picayune_ were no more successful than
their brethren of the _Times-Democrat_. They, too, were compelled to
substitute fiction for facts in their attempt to prove Charles a
desperado. In the issue of the twenty-sixth of July it was said that
Charles was well known in Vicksburg, and was there a consort of thieves.
They mentioned that a man named Benson Blake was killed in 1894 or 1895,
and that four Negroes were captured, and two escaped. Of the two escaped
they claim that Charles was one. The four negroes who were captured were
put in jail, and as usual, in the high state of civilization which
characterizes Mississippi, the right of the person accused of crime to an
indictment by legal process and a legal trial by jury was considered an
useless formality if the accused happened to be black. A mob went to the
jail that night, the four colored men were delivered to the mob, and all
four were hanged in the court-house yard. The reporters evidently assumed
that Charles was guilty, if, in fact, he was ever there, because the other
four men were lynched. They did not consider it was a fact of any
importance that Charles was never indicted. They called him a murderer on
general principles.


+DIED IN SELF-DEFENSE+

The life, character and death of Robert Charles challenges the thoughtful
consideration of all fair-minded people. In the frenzy of the moment, when
nearly a dozen men lay dead, the victims of his unerring and death-dealing
aim, it was natural for a prejudiced press and for citizens in private
life to denounce him as a desperado and a murderer. But sea depths are not
measured when the ocean rages, nor can absolute justice be determined
while public opinion is lashed into fury. There must be calmness to insure
correctness of judgment. The fury of the hour must abate before we can
deal justly with any man or any cause.

That Charles was not a desperado is amply shown by the discussion in the
preceding chapter. The darkest pictures which the reporters could paint of
Charles were quoted freely, so that the public might find upon what
grounds the press declared him to be a lawbreaker. Unquestionably the
grounds are wholly insufficient. Not a line of evidence has been presented
to prove that Charles was the fiend which the first reports of the New
Orleans charge him to be.

Nothing more should be required to establish his good reputation, for the
rule is universal that a reputation must be assumed to be good until it is
proved bad. But that rule does not apply to the Negro, for as soon as he
is suspected the public judgment immediately determines that he is guilty
of whatever crime he stands charged. For this reason, as a matter of duty
to the race, and the simple justice to the memory of Charles, an
investigation has been made of the life and character of Charles before
the fatal affray which led to his death.

Robert Charles was not an educated man. He was a student who faithfully
investigated all the phases of oppression from which his race has
suffered. That he was a student is amply shown by the _Times-Democrat_
report of the twenty-fifth, which says:

"Well-worn textbooks, bearing his name written in his own scrawling
handwriting, and well-filled copy-books found in his trunk, showed that he
had burned the midnight oil, and desired to improve himself intellectually
in order that he might conquer the hated white race." From this quotation
it will be seen that he spent the hours after days of hard toil in trying
to improve himself, both in the study of textbooks and in writing.

He knew that he was a student of a problem which required all the
intelligence that a man could command, and he was burning his midnight
oil gathering knowledge that he might better be able to come to an
intelligent solution. To his aid in the study of this problem he sought
the aid of a Christian newspaper, the _Voice of Missions_, the organ of
the African Methodist Episcopal Church. He was in communication with its
editor, who is a bishop, and is known all over this country as a man of
learning, a lover of justice and the defender of law and order. Charles
could receive from Bishop Turner not a word of encouragement to be other
than an earnest, tireless and God-fearing student of the complex problems
which affected the race.

For further help and assistance in his studies, Charles turned to an
organization which has existed and flourished for many years, at all times
managed by men of high Christian standing and absolute integrity. These
men believe and preach a doctrine that the best interests of the Negro
will be subserved by an emigration from America back to the Fatherland,
and they do all they can to spread the doctrine of emigration and to give
material assistance to those who desire to leave America and make their
future homes in Africa. This organization is known as "The International
Migration Society." It has its headquarters in Birmingham, Alabama. From
this place it issues pamphlets, some of which were found, in the home of
Robert Charles, and which pamphlets the reporters of the New Orleans
papers declare to be incendiary and dangerous in their doctrine and
teaching.

Nothing could be further from the truth. Copies of any and all of them may
be secured by writing to D.J. Flummer, who is President and in charge of
the home office in Birmingham, Alabama. Three of the pamphlets found in
Charles's room are named respectively:

First, _Prospectus of the Liberian Colonization Society_; which pamphlet
in a few brief pages tells of the work of the society, plans, prices and
terms of transportation of colored people who choose to go to Africa.
These pages are followed by a short, conservative discussion of the Negro
question, and close with an argument that Africa furnishes the best asylum
for the oppressed Negroes in this country.

The second pamphlet is entitled _Christian Civilization of Africa_. This
is a brief statement of the advantages of the Republic of Liberia, and an
argument in support of the superior conditions which colored people may
attain to by leaving the South and settling in Liberia.

The third pamphlet is entitled _The Negro and Liberia_. This is a larger
document than the other two, and treats more exhaustively the question of
emigration, but from the first page to the last there is not an
incendiary line or sentence. There is not even a suggestion of violence in
all of its thirty-two pages, and not a word which could not be preached
from every pulpit in the land.

If it is true that the workman is known by his tools, certainly no harm
could ever come from the doctrines which were preached by Charles or the
papers and pamphlets distributed by him. Nothing ever written in the
_Voice of Missions_, and nothing ever published in the pamphlets above
alluded to in the remotest way suggest that a peaceable man should turn
lawbreaker, or that any man should dye his hands in his brother's blood.

In order to secure as far as possible positive information about the life
and character of Robert Charles, it was plain that the best course to
pursue was to communicate with those with whom he had sustained business
relations. Accordingly a letter was forwarded to Mr. D.J. Flummer, who is
president of the colonization society, in which letter he was asked to
state in reply what information he had of the life and character of Robert
Charles. The result was a very prompt letter in response, the text of
which is as follows:

  Birmingham, Ala., Aug. 21, 1900

  Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, Ill.:

  Dear Madam--Replying to your favor of recent date requesting me to write
  you giving such information as I may have concerning the life, habits
  and character of Robert Charles, who recently shot and killed police
  officers in New Orleans, I wish to say that my knowledge of him is only
  such as I have gained from his business connection with the
  International Migration Society during the past five or six years,
  during which time I was president of the society.

  He having learned that the purpose of this society was to colonize the
  colored people in Liberia, West Africa, and thereby lessen or destroy
  the friction and prejudice existing in this country between the two
  races, set about earnestly and faithfully distributing the literature
  that we issued from time to time. He always appeared to be mild but
  earnest in his advocacy of emigration, and never to my knowledge used
  any method or means that would in the least appear unreasonable, and had
  always kept within the bounds of law and order in advocating emigration.

  The work he performed for this society was all gratuitous, and
  apparently prompted from his love of humanity, and desires to be
  instrumental in building up a Negro Nationality in Africa.

  If he ever violated a law before the killing of the policemen, I do not
  know of it.

  Yours, very truly,

  D.J. Flummer

Besides this statement, Mr. Flummer enclosed a letter received by the
Society two days before the tragedy at New Orleans. This letter was
written by Robert Charles, and it attests his devotion to the cause of
emigration which he had espoused. Memoranda on the margin of the letter
show that the order was filled by mailing the pamphlets. It is very
probable that these were the identical pamphlets which were found by the
mob which broke into the room of Robert Charles and seized upon these
harmless documents and declared they were sufficient evidence to prove
Charles a desperado. In the light of subsequent events the letter of
Charles, which follows, sounds like a voice from the tomb:

New Orleans, July 30,1900

  Mr. D.J. Flummer:

  Dear Sir--I received your last pamphlets and they are all given out. I
  want you to send me some more, and I enclose you the stamps. I think I
  will go over in Greenville, Miss., and give my people some pamphlets
  over there.

  Yours truly,

  Robert Charles

The latest word of information comes from New Orleans from a man who knew
Charles intimately for six years. For obvious reasons, his name is
withheld. In answer to a letter sent him he answers as follows:

  New Orleans, Aug. 23, 1900

  Mrs. Ida B. Wells-Barnett:

  Dear Madam--It affords me great pleasure to inform you as far as I know
  of Robert Charles. I have been acquainted with him about six years in
  this city. He never has, as I know, given any trouble to anyone. He was
  quiet and a peaceful man and was very frank in speaking. He was too much
  of a hero to die; few call be found to equal him. I am very sorry to
  say that I do not know anything of his birthplace, nor his parents, but
  enclosed find letter from his uncle, from which you may find more
  information. You will also find one of the circulars in which Charles
  was in possession of which was styled as a crazy document. Let me say,
  until our preachers preach this document we will always be slaves. If
  you can help circulate this "crazy" doctrine I would be glad to have you
  do so, for I shall never rest until I get to that heaven on earth; that
  is, the west coast of Africa, in Liberia.

  With best wishes to you I still remain, as always, for the good of the
  race,

  ----

By only those whose anger and vindictiveness warp their judgment is Robert
Charles a desperado. Their word is not supported by the statement of a
single fact which justifies their judgment and no criminal record shows
that he was ever indicted for any offense, much less convicted of crime.
On the contrary, his work for many years had been with Christian people,
circulating emigration pamphlets and active as agent for a mission
publication. Men who knew him say that he was a law-abiding, quiet,
industrious, peaceable man. So he lived.

So he lived and so he would have died had not he raised his hand to resent
unprovoked assault and unlawful arrest that fateful Monday night. That
made him an outlaw, and being a man of courage he decided to die with his
face to the foe. The white people of this country may charge that he was a
desperado, but to the people of his own race Robert Charles will always be
regarded as the hero of New Orleans.


+BURNING HUMAN BEINGS ALIVE +

Not only has life been taken by mobs in the past twenty years, but the
ordinary procedure of hanging and shooting have been improved upon during
the past ten years. Fifteen human beings have been burned to death in the
different parts of the country by mobs. Men, women and children have gone
to see the sight, and all have approved the barbarous deeds done in the
high light of the civilization and Christianity of this country.

In 1891 Ed Coy was burned to death in Texarkana, Ark. He was charged with
assaulting a white woman, and after the mob had securely tied him to a
tree, the men and boys amused themselves for some time sticking knives
into Coy's body and slicing off pieces, of flesh. When they had amused
themselves sufficiently, they poured coal oil over him and the women in
the case set fire to him. It is said that fifteen thousand people stood by
and saw him burned. This was on a Sunday night, and press reports told how
the people looked on while the Negro burned to death.

Feb. 1, 1893, Henry Smith was burned to death in Paris, Texas. The entire
county joined in that exhibition. The district attorney himself went for
the prisoner and turned him over to the mob. He was placed upon a float
and drawn by four white horses through the principal streets of the city.
Men, women and children stood at their doors and waved their handkerchiefs
and cheered the echoes. They knew that the man was to be burned to death
because the newspaper had declared for three days previous that this would
be so. Excursions were run by all the railroads, and the mayor of the town
gave the children a holiday so that they might see the sight.

Henry Smith was charged with having assaulted and murdered a little white
girl. He was an imbecile, and while he had killed the child, there was no
proof that he had criminally assaulted her. He was tied to a stake on a
platform which had been built ten feet high, so that everybody might see
the sight. The father and brother and uncle of the little white girl that
had been murdered was upon that platform about fifty minutes entertaining
the crowd of ten thousand persons by burning the victim's flesh with
red-hot irons. Their own newspapers told how they burned his eyes out and,
ran the red-hot iron down his throat, cooking his tongue, and how the
crowd cheered wild delight. At last, having declared themselves satisfied,
coal oil was poured over him and he was burned to death, and the mob
fought over the ashes for bones and pieces of his clothes.

July 7, 1893, in Bardwell, Ky., C.J. Miller was burned to ashes. Since his
death this man has been found to be absolutely innocent of the murder of
the two white girls with which he was charged. But the mob would wait for
no justification. They insisted that, as they were not sure he was the
right man, they would compromise the matter by hanging him instead of
burning. Not to be outdone, they took the body down and made a huge
bonfire out of it.

July 22, 1893, at Memphis, Tenn., the body of Lee Walker was dragged
through the street and burned before the court house. Walker had
frightened some girls in a wagon along a country road by asking them to
let him ride in their wagon. They cried out; some men working in a field
near by said it was at attempt of assault, and of course began to look for
their prey. There was never any charge of rape; the women only declared
that he attempted an assault. After he was apprehended and put in jail and
perfectly helpless, the mob dragged him out, shot him, cut him, beat him
with sticks, built a fire and burned the legs off, then took the trunk of
the body down and dragged further up the street, and at last burned it
before the court house.

Sept. 20, 1893, at Roanoke, Va., the body of a Negro who had quarreled
with a white woman was burned in the presence of several thousand persons.
These people also wreaked their vengeance upon this helpless victim of the
mob's wrath by sticking knives into him, kicking him and beating him with
stones and otherwise mutilating him before life was extinct.

June 11, 1898, at Knoxville, Ark., James Perry was shut up in a cabin
because he had smallpox and burned to death. He had been quarantined in
this cabin when it was declared that he had this disease and the doctor
sent for. When the physician arrived he found only a few smoldering
embers. Upon inquiry some railroad hands who were working nearby revealed
the fact that they had fastened the door of the cabin and set fire to the
cabin and burned man and hut together.

Feb. 22, 1898, at Lake City, S.C., Postmaster Baker and his infant child
were burned to death by a mob that had set fire to his house. Mr. Baker's
crime was that he had refused to give up the post office, to which he had
been appointed by the National Government. The mob had tried to drive him
away by persecution and intimidation. Finding that all else had failed,
they went to his home in the dead of night and set fire to his house, and
as the family rushed forth they were greeted by a volley of bullets. The
father and his baby were shot through the open door and wounded so badly
that they fell back in the fire and were burned to death. The remainder of
the family, consisting of the wife and five children, escaped with their
lives from the burning house, but all of them were shot, one of the number
made a cripple for life.

Jan. 7, 1898, two Indians were tied to a tree at Maud Post Office, Indian
Territory, and burned to death by a white mob. They were charged with
murdering a white woman. There was no proof of their guilt except the
unsupported word of the mob. Yet they were tied to a tree and slowly
roasted to death. Their names were Lewis McGeesy and Hond Martin. Since
that time these boys have been found to be absolutely innocent of the
charge. Of course that discovery is too late to be of any benefit to them,
but because they were Indians the Indian Commissioner demanded and
received from the United States Government an indemnity of $13,000.

April 23, 1899, at Palmetto, Ga., Sam Hose was burned alive in the
presence of a throng, on Sunday afternoon. He was charged with killing a
man named Cranford, his employer, which he admitted he did because his
employer was about to shoot him. To the fact of killing the employer was
added the absolutely false charge that Hose assaulted the wife. Hose was
arrested and no trial was given him. According to the code of reasoning of
the mob, none was needed. A white man had been killed and a white woman
was said to have been assaulted. That was enough. When Hose was found he
had to die.

The Atlanta Constitution, in speaking of the murder of Cranford, said that
the Negro who was suspected would be burned alive. Not only this, but it
offered $500 reward for his capture. After he had been apprehended, it was
publicly announced that he would be burned alive. Excursion trains were
run and bulletins were put up in the small towns. The Governor of Georgia
was in Atlanta while excursion trains were being made up to take visitors
to the burning. Many fair ladies drove out in their carriages on Sunday
afternoon to witness the torture and burning of a human being. Hose's ears
were cut off, then his toes and fingers, and passed round to the crowd.
His eyes were put out, his tongue torn out and flesh cut in strips by
knives. Finally they poured coal oil on him and burned him to death. They
dragged his half-consumed trunk out of the flames, cut it open, extracted
his heart and liver, and sold slices for ten cents each for souvenirs, all
of which was published most promptly in the daily papers of Georgia and
boasted over by the people of that section.

Oct. 19, 1889, at Canton, Miss., Joseph Leflore was burned to death. A
house had been entered and its occupants murdered during the absence of
the husband and father. When the discovery was made, it was immediately
supposed that the crime was the work of a Negro, and the motive that of
assaulting white women.

Bloodhounds were procured and they made a round of the village and
discovered only one colored man absent from his home. This was taken to be
proof sufficient that he was the perpetrator of the deed. When he returned
home he was apprehended, taken into the yard of the house that had been
burned down, tied to a stake, and was slowly roasted to death.

Dec. 6, 1899, at Maysville, Ky., Wm. Coleman also was burned to death. He
was slowly roasted, first one foot and then the other, and dragged out of
the fire so that the torture might be prolonged. All of this without a
shadow of proof or scintilla of evidence that the man had committed the
crime.

Thus have the mobs of this country taken the lives of their victims within
the past ten years. In every single instance except one these burnings
were witnessed by from two thousand to fifteen thousand people, and no one
person in all these crowds throughout the country had the courage to raise
his voice and speak out against the awful barbarism of burning human
beings to death.

Men and women of America, are you proud of this record which the
Anglo-Saxon race has made for itself? Your silence seems to say that you
are. Your silence encourages a continuance of this sort of horror. Only by
earnest, active, united endeavor to arouse public sentiment can we hope to
put a stop to these demonstrations of American barbarism.


+LYNCHING RECORD+

The following table of lynchings has been kept year by year by the Chicago
Tribune, beginning with 1882, and shows the list of Negroes that have been
lynched during that time:

1882, Negroes murdered by mobs       52
1883, Negroes murdered by mobs       39
1884, Negroes murdered by mobs       53
1885, Negroes murdered by mobs      164
1886, Negroes murdered by mobs      136
1887, Negroes murdered by mobs      128
1888, Negroes murdered by mobs      143
1889, Negroes murdered by mobs      127
1890, Negroes murdered by mobs      171
1891, Negroes murdered by mobs      192
1892, Negroes murdered by mobs      241
1893, Negroes murdered by mobs      200
1894, Negroes murdered by mobs      190
1895, Negroes murdered by mobs      171
1896, Negroes murdered by mobs      131
1897, Negroes murdered by mobs      156
1898, Negroes murdered by mobs      127
1899, Negroes murdered by mobs      107

Of these thousands of men and women who have been put to death without
judge or jury, less than one-third of them have been even accused of
criminal assault. The world at large has accepted unquestionably the
statement that Negroes are lynched only for assaults upon white women. Of
those who were lynched from 1882 to 1891, the first ten years of the
tabulated lynching record, the charges are as follows:

Two hundred and sixty-nine were charged with rape; 253 with murder; 44
with robbery; 37 with incendiarism; 4 with burglary; 27 with race
prejudice; 13 quarreled with white men; 10 with making threats; 7 with
rioting; 5 with miscegenation; in 32 cases no reasons were given, the
victims were lynched on general principles.

During the past five years the record is as follows:

Of the 171 persons lynched in 1895 only 34 were charged with this crime.
In 1896, out of 131 persons who were lynched, only 34 were said to have
assaulted women. Of the 156 in 1897, only 32. In 1898, out of 127 persons
lynched, 24 were charged with the alleged "usual crime." In 1899, of the
107 lynchings, 16 were said to be for crimes against women. These figures,
of course, speak for themselves, and to the unprejudiced, fair-minded
person it is only necessary to read and study them in order to show that
the charge that the Negro is a moral outlaw is a false one, made for the
purpose of injuring the Negro's good name and to create public sentiment
against him.

If public sentiment were alive, as it should be upon the subject, it would
refuse to be longer hoodwinked, and the voice of conscience would refuse
to be stilled by these false statements. If the laws of the country were
obeyed and respected by the white men of the country who charge that the
Negro has no respect for law, these things could not be, for every
individual, no matter what the charge, would have a fair trial and an
opportunity to prove his guilt or innocence before a tribunal of law.

That is all the Negro asks--that is all the friends of law and order need
to ask, for once the law of the land is supreme, no individual who commits
crime will escape punishment.

Individual Negroes commit crimes the same as do white men, but that the
Negro race is peculiarly given to assault upon women, is a falsehood of
the deepest dye. The tables given above show that the Negro who is saucy
to white men is lynched as well as the Negro who is charged with assault
upon women. Less than one-sixth of the lynchings last year, 1899, were
charged with rape.

The Negro points to his record during the war in rebuttal of this false
slander. When the white women and children of the South had no protector
save only these Negroes, not one instance is known where the trust was
betrayed. It is remarkably strange that the Negro had more respect for
womanhood with the white men of the South hundreds of miles away, than
they have today, when surrounded by those who take their lives with
impunity and burn and torture, even worse than the "unspeakable Turk."

Again, the white women of the North came South years ago, threaded the
forests, visited the cabins, taught the schools and associated only with
the Negroes whom they came to teach, and had no protectors near at hand.
They had no charge or complaint to make of the danger to themselves after
association with this class of human beings. Not once has the country been
shocked by such recitals from them as come from the women who are
surrounded by their husbands, brothers, lovers and friends. If the Negro's
nature is bestial, it certainly should have proved itself in one of these
two instances. The Negro asks only justice and an impartial consideration
of these facts.



